140
Collection of Legislation
Year 1985
procedure is directed against the infringer.

Casa de la Vall, 31 July 1985
The Deputy General Syndic

Law
on the policing and protection of waters
approved by the M.I. General Council in its session of 31 July 1985

Preliminary Title

Article 1
The purpose of this law is to establish the legal framework for the policing and protection of waters.

The objectives of the policing and protection of waters are as follows:

To guarantee the healthiness and hygiene of waters intended for human or animal consumption

To guarantee the hygienic and sanitary conditions of swimming pools and their facilities

To establish the requirements for the declaration and use of thermal and mineral waters

To regulate the discharge of wastewater

To guarantee the protection of surface waters

Title I. Potable waters

Chapter one. General provisions

Article 2
Water intended, directly or indirectly, for human or animal consumption must be potable.

Article 3
Water for human consumption is understood as:

Water for urban, public, or private supply

Bottled water

Water used for the manufacture, treatment, or preservation of substances or products intended for human consumption

Waters that affect the healthiness of the final food product

Article 4
Potable water is that which meets all the characteristics determined by regulation.

Article 5
Ice intended for human consumption or that is in direct contact with products intended for human consumption must be produced from potable water and handled in a way that preserves its potability.

Chapter two. Protection and surveillance of potable waters

Section one. Protection

Article 6
All potable water abstraction, whether of surface or underground origin, must be isolated by creating a protection perimeter, within which no activity may be carried out without the prior authorization of the Executive Council.

Regulations shall determine which activities remain prohibited within the protection perimeter and which, consequently, are not subject to authorization.

Article 7
The Executive Council shall establish, on a case-by-case basis, the location of the protection perimeter, based on a geological study that will establish the relationship between the infiltration zones and the collection point to be protected.

Article 8
The establishment of the protection perimeter may never be to the detriment of third parties. To that end, the person or entity wishing to exploit the potable water abstraction must be the owner of or have the right to use the lands included within the protection perimeter.

Where applicable, and following a declaration of the public utility of the abstraction, the lands included within the protection perimeter may be subject to expropriation through the legally established procedure.

Section two. Surveillance

Article 9
Water for human or animal consumption shall be subject to periodic analytical controls to verify that it is potable at all times. The Executive Council shall establish by regulation the methodology, procedure, frequency, and determination of sampling points, and shall carry out the aforementioned surveillance activity.

Chapter three. Water supply

Article 10
A regulation of the Executive Council shall determine the technical conditions that water supply facilities for human consumption must meet in order to guarantee their potability.

Article 11
Any natural or legal person, private or public, who wishes to carry out the supply of water for human consumption must prove that the planned installation complies with all the requirements established by regulation and apply for the pertinent authorization from the Executive Council.

Article 12
The supply of potable water via tanker trucks shall only be authorized on an exceptional basis.

Chapter four. Bottled waters

Article 13
Any person, natural or legal, private or public, who wishes to proceed with the commercial exploitation of a water source, by selling bottled water for human consumption, shall require the prior authorization of the Executive Council.

Article 14
To obtain the authorization referred to in the preceding article, the applicant must accredit compliance with the technical conditions that shall be determined by regulation with regard to the quality of the water and the characteristics of the packaging and the bottling facility.

Any 1985
Collection of Legislation
141

Title II. Swimming Pools

Article 15
The construction, renovation, or expansion of swimming pools not reserved for personal or family use shall require the prior authorization of the Executive Council.

The opening of swimming pools also requires a license from the Executive Council. For the granting of said license, the hygienic and sanitary conditions of the premises and their facilities, as well as those of the swimming pool itself, shall be taken into account.

Article 16
The conditions to be observed in the construction of swimming pools and their premises, as well as those concerning the quality of the water and maintenance facilities, shall be determined by regulation.

The regulation must take into account the different types of swimming pools, according to their volume and use, whether public or private.

Article 17
Any public or private person who operates a swimming pool not reserved for personal or family use must impose on its users compliance with a set of internal regulations that shall necessarily contain those hygienic and sanitary rules determined by regulation.

Article 18
The Executive Council shall periodically inspect the swimming pools subject to this law and shall adopt the appropriate measures to correct any defects observed.

Article 19
The public or private person who operates a swimming pool subject to the provisions of this law shall be liable for any damages that may be caused by non-compliance with the hygienic and sanitary rules established by this law and by the regulations that implement it.

Title III. Thermal and mineral waters

Chapter one. Declaration of waters as thermal or mineral

Article 20
The declaration of the thermal or mineral status of a given water shall be made by the Executive Council, following a technical report from the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare. The aforementioned declaration shall be a prerequisite for the authorization to use the waters as thermal or mineral waters.

Article 21
Mineral waters are understood to be those natural waters that come from underground layers and which, due to their special chemical composition or physical state, present certain therapeutic properties or are suitable for industrial use.

Article 22
Thermal waters are understood to be those natural waters that come from underground layers and which spring at a temperature at least 5°C higher than the annual average of the environment where the source is located.

Article 23
The resolution of the Executive Council by which the classification of a water as thermal or mineral is granted shall be notified to the interested party and published in the Official Gazette of the Principality.

Chapter two. Use of thermal and mineral waters

Article 24
Mineral waters may be intended for consumption, following their conditioning and bottling, or for industrial purposes, and thermal waters may be used for therapeutic purposes in specialized establishments.

All these uses require the prior authorization of the Executive Council.

Article 25
To obtain authorization for the use of thermal waters, compliance with the hygienic and sanitary conditions that shall be determined by regulation, with regard to the operation of the thermal establishments, must be guaranteed.

Article 26
To obtain authorization for the use of mineral waters, the quality of the water and the hygienic and sanitary conditions that shall be established by regulation for the conditioning and bottling industries must be guaranteed.

Article 27
At the same time as it grants authorization for the use, the Executive Council must establish the protection perimeter of the water source, in accordance with the provisions of articles 6 to 8 of this law.

Title IV. Wastewater

Chapter one. General provision

Article 28
The evacuation and discharge of wastewater and rainwater must be carried out in accordance with the provisions contained in this law and in the regulations that implement it.

Article 29
Wastewater shall be discharged into sewers or collectors and, in the cases and forms provided for by this law, into surface waters. With the sole exception of what is provided for in article 36, below, the discharge of wastewater into the soil or subsoil is prohibited.

Chapter two. Conditions for discharges into surface waters

Article 30
All discharge of wastewater into surface waters shall require the authorization of the Executive Council.

The Executive Council shall determine by regulation the conditions that must be met to obtain the aforementioned authorization, based on the nature of the discharge.

Article 31
The Executive Council shall periodically monitor the discharges of wastewater into surface waters and shall adopt the necessary measures to guarantee the health of the receiving environment. To that end, it may order the suspension of the discharges or require the installation of purification equipment.

142
Collection of Legislation
Year 1985

Chapter three. Water treatment plants

Article 32
Without prejudice to any applicable construction permits, the opening of a water treatment plant shall require a specific authorization issued by the Executive Council, the purpose of which shall be to verify that the plant meets the necessary conditions to guarantee the legally permitted discharge.

Article 33
The Executive Council shall periodically inspect the operation of the treatment plants and shall adopt the appropriate measures to correct any defects observed therein.

Article 34
The public or private person responsible for the operation, functioning, and maintenance of a treatment plant shall be liable for any damages that may be caused by its malfunction.

Chapter four. Conveyance of water to the sewer system

Article 35
No authorization for the construction of buildings shall be granted if the application is not accompanied by the report and corresponding plans for the system to convey wastewater to the sewer system.

Article 36
The Executive Council shall establish by regulation the conditions that wastewater pipes must respect, both with regard to their construction and their maintenance.

Article 37
The discharge into sewers of industrial wastewater from especially hazardous activities shall be subject to specific regulation by the Executive Council.

In any case, authorization from the Executive Council shall be required for discharges from laundries-dry cleaners, automobile repair shops and service stations, animal pens, stables and livestock facilities, tanneries and white-tanning workshops, textile finishing plants, distilleries, and yeast factories, as well as all others that may be determined by regulation.

Title V. Surface waters

Chapter one. Protection of surface waters

Article 38
The Administration shall ensure the maintenance of the natural state of surface waters, preventing any type of pollution that may endanger the health of humans and animals, hinder the use of water for consumption purposes, affect the ecosystem, or damage the beauty of the landscape. To this end, a system of protection and control of surface waters is established.

Article 39
Discharges of wastewater into surface waters are regulated by the provisions of Title IV of this law.

Article 40
It is prohibited to throw objects of any kind into surface waters, especially domestic, industrial, or agricultural waste that, by its nature, may alter their quality.

Article 41
It is prohibited to wash or clean people, animals, or things in surface waters under public ownership or in waters under private ownership intended for human or animal consumption.

Chapter two. Classification and control

Article 42
The Executive Council shall classify surface waters according to their quality and, based on this, shall determine the uses for each of the types. To this end, it shall prepare an inventory in which the state of each of the surface waters will be recorded.

Article 43
The Executive Council shall periodically monitor the state of surface waters and shall adopt the appropriate measures to maintain the quality of each of the types.

These controls shall also be carried out whenever exceptional circumstances susceptible to altering the quality of the waters occur.

Title VI. Sanctions and liability

Chapter one. Infringements and sanctions

Section one. General provisions

Article 44
The provisions of this law refer to infringements and sanctions of an administrative nature and do not affect the civil or criminal liability that may arise from the same actions or omissions.

Article 45
Under no circumstances shall it be possible to impose a double administrative and criminal sanction for the same conduct. If a criminal proceeding is underway, the processing of the administrative procedure shall be suspended until a final judgment is rendered in the criminal jurisdiction.

Article 46
Private persons, natural or legal, who have participated by action or omission shall be liable for the infringements.

Article 47
If the infringement was committed in the course of an activity authorized by the Administration, the holder of the authorization shall be held responsible.

Article 48
For infringements in bottled products, the holder of the firm or company name that appears on the label shall be held responsible, unless its forgery or the poor conservation of the product by the holder is demonstrated, provided that the conservation conditions are specified on the original packaging.

Article 49
When an infringement is attributed to a legal person, the persons who make up its governing or management bodies, as well as the technicians responsible for its production and control, may also be considered liable.

Any 1985
Collection of Legislation
143

Section two. Infringements

Article 50
The following are infringements of the provisions of this law:

a) Failure to hold authorization for carrying out those activities that require it.

b) Non-compliance with the requirements, conditions, obligations, or prohibitions established in legal norms or in the authorizations granted by the Administration. In the first case, the provisions of the transitional provisions of this legal text must be taken into account.

c) The supply of water in poor conditions of health or hygiene and sanitation.

d) Actions or omissions that entail risks or actual damage to human or animal health, or that negatively affect the ecosystem or the beauty of the landscape, whether deliberately or through abandonment of the diligence required in each specific case.

e) Non-compliance with the orders that, in case of need, the Administration issues for the purpose of protecting the state of the waters or repairing the damages suffered.

f) The marketing as thermal or mineral waters of waters that spring in Andorra without having obtained the prior classification of such status.

g) The refusal or resistance to supply data or to provide the information required by the competent authority with regard to the performance of the surveillance and inspection functions to which this law refers, as well as the supply of inaccurate information or false documentation.

Article 51
The infringements listed in the preceding article may be minor, serious, or very serious.

Article 52
The infringements listed in article 51, paragraphs b), f), and g) are considered minor infringements.

Article 53
The following are considered serious infringements:

The infringements listed in article 51, paragraphs a), c), d), and e).

A repeated offense of minor infringements within a period of one year.

Article 54
The following are considered very serious infringements:

The commission of any infringement classified in article 51 that endangers human life.

A repeated offense of serious infringements within a period of five years.

Section three. Sanctions

Article 55
The infringements to which this law refers shall be sanctioned by the application of the following measures:

Minor infringements: fine of up to 100,000 pesetas.

Serious infringements: fine ranging from 100,001 to 500,000 pesetas.

Very serious infringements: fine ranging from 500,001 to 10,000,000 pesetas.

Article 56
The amount of the sanction, within each of the types, shall be graded by seeking to achieve the appropriate proportionality between the infringement and the sanction. For these purposes, the following criteria shall be taken into account:

Prejudicial effect of the infringement on the public interest.

Prejudicial effect or damage caused to persons or property.

Benefit obtained by the infringer.

Intent, fault, or negligence.

Article 57
In cases of serious or very serious infringements, the revocation of the authorization that had been granted may be agreed upon as an accessory sanction.

Article 58
The authority responsible for resolving the case may, at any time, order the seizure of any waters intended for human consumption that are not in good condition.

Article 59
The infringements to which this law refers shall be time-barred after two years, except for the very serious ones, which shall be time-barred after five years. The limitation period shall begin to run from the day on which the infringement was committed, and shall be interrupted from the moment the procedure is directed against the infringer.

Chapter two. Liability

Article 60
Regardless of the sanctions that may be imposed on the infringers, they must repair the damages they have caused to public and private waters.

Additional provisions

Sole
In all cases in which this law establishes the need for authorization from the Executive Council, it must be understood that this is a specific requirement under the health regulations which does not exempt from the obligation to obtain any other construction permits or others from the local Administration and the Central Administration that may be necessary in each case.

Transitional provisions

First
All persons and entities that, prior to the entry into force of this law, have been carrying out activities for which this law requires authorization, must obtain the said authorization within a period of two years. Once this period has elapsed without them having obtained it, they must cease the activities in question and, otherwise, they will incur the infringement classified in article 51 a) of this law.

Second
Those waters that were marketed as thermal or mineral prior to the entry into force of this law must obtain the classification of such status within a period of two years. Once the said period has elapsed without the classification having been obtained, they may no longer be exploited as thermal or mineral waters, and if they continue to be so, the person or entity doing so will incur the infringement classified in article 51 f) of this law.

Third
Until the publication of the Official Gazette of the Principality of Andorra, created by law of 19 May 1983, has begun, the publication of notices, according to the traditional procedure, shall be sufficient to comply with the publicity requirement for those acts that must be subject to it, by provision of this law.

Fourth
Once the perimeters referred to in articles 6 to 8 and 27 of this law have been determined, the authorization to which article 6 of this legal text refers must be obtained within a period of one year.

Fifth
As long as the general rules of administrative procedure have not been approved, the Executive Council is empowered to determine the sanctioning procedure in the matter of this law.

In any case, the resolution of cases for serious or very serious infringements shall correspond to the Executive Council.

Final provisions

First
The Executive Council is authorized to implement this law by means of regulation.

Second
This law shall enter into force fifteen days after its publication.

Casa de la Vall, 31 July 1985
The Deputy General Syndic

144
Collection of Legislation
Year 1985

Law
on solid waste
approved by the M.I. General Council in its session of 31 July 1985

Chapter I. General provisions

Article 1
This law aims to establish the legal framework relating to the storage, collection, and treatment of solid waste.

Article 2
The measures to be adopted by the competent bodies in the matter shall be oriented towards achieving the following purposes:

a) To prevent environmental pollution and the degradation of the landscape.

b) To prevent the uncontrolled abandonment of solid waste.

c) To promote the most effective management methods for solid waste collection and to develop the most suitable techniques for each case.

d) To regulate the means of solid waste treatment that allow for alternative and profitable formulas for their use.

e) To avoid the nuisances and dangers that may arise from the disposal of solid waste.

Article 3
For the purposes of this law, solid waste is understood as that which results from a series of public, industrial, commercial, and agricultural activities, which are not gaseous or liquid and which, among others, include:

a) Detritus of all kinds, especially household garbage, ashes, cinders from central heating systems, pieces of glass or porcelain, leaves, and all kinds of waste.

b) Waste from industrial and commercial establishments, offices, administrations, patios, and private gardens.

c) Manure, fertilizers, dead leaves, sludge, and, in general, all products originating from the cleaning of public thoroughfares, private roads subject to cleaning, public gardens, parks, cemeteries, and their dependencies.

d) Products from the cleaning and remains of markets, fairs, livestock fairs, and public recreational areas.

e) Waste from schools, hospitals, prisons, and public buildings.

f) Large-sized objects, as well as carcasses of domestic animals.

g) Rubble, demolition debris, construction site remains, and, in general, demolition material, from both public and private works.

h) Ashes and cinders from factories and, in general, all waste from any commerce or industry, from patios and private gardens, anatomical and infectious remains from hospitals or clinics, as well as the remains and offal from slaughterhouses.

Article 4
The final destination of solid waste through its treatment is its disposal or recovery.

Disposal includes controlled landfilling, as well as the destruction of waste by systems that do not involve energy recovery.

Recovery includes any industrial process aimed at recuperating or transforming the resources contained in the waste.

Article 5
Local Corporations may establish with the private sector the most suitable conventional or organizational formulas for the effective provision of the solid waste collection and treatment service.

They may also establish agreements between various administrative bodies for the joint management of the services mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

Chapter II. Storage and disposal

Article 6
Natural or legal persons whose activities produce solid waste are obliged to make it available to the local Corporations in the conditions established by regulation.