

--- PAGE 1 ---

Law    
No. 111/2012 
 
ON INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES 2 
 
Pursuant to articles 78 a n d  83 point 1 of the Constitution, with the proposal of the Council 
of Ministers,   
THE PARLIAMENT 
OF THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA  
DECIDED: 
CHAPTER I 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Article 1 
Purpose 
 
The purpose of this law is to: 
a) Protect and improve the aquatic environment, surface water, be them transitional or 
permanent, inland marine waters, terrestrial waters, exclusive economic areas, continental shelf, trans-
boundary waters, groundwater, and their status;                                                                                                        
b) Secure, protect and rational development and use of water resources, essential for life and 
the social and economic development of the country;  
c) Provide fair distribution of water resources, according to the aims of use, and their 
efficient administration;                                                                                               
d) Protect water resources from pollution, misuse and spending above actual needs; 
ç) define the institutional framework, at a local and national level, in order to enact a nation 
policy for the administration and management of water resources to the benefit of the 
community and the to the social and economic interests of the country. 
 
Article 2 
Scope                                                                                               
 
1. The provisions of this law shall regulate the legal relations that arise by the use of water 
resources in the Republic of Albania.                                                                                               
2. The provisions of this law shall apply to:                                                                                               
a) Inland marine waters, terrestrial waters, the coastline, exclusive economic areas, 
continental shelf, surface and groundwater, along with the water-bearing layers and atmospheric 
precipitations, trans-boundary waters, natural resources and lagoon waters in the protected areas;  
b) Curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and geothermal waters, with the exception of mineral 
and geothermal waters which are suitable for the extraction of raw minerals or use of accumulated 
thermic energy for energy producing purposes which are regulated by special laws.   
 
Article 3                                                                                               
The Object of the law                                                                                           
 
The provisions of this law have the objectives of determining the:                                                                          
 
a) security, protection and rational use of water resources;                                                                                     
b) implementation of specific plans for the improvement of water resources, protection of 
surface water, be them transitional or permanent, inland marine waters, exclusive economic 
areas, continental shelf, trans-boundary waters, groundwater, and their status; 


--- PAGE 2 ---

c) promoting sustainable use of water through long-term protection of water resources; 
ç) methods to be applied and the conditions for integrated management, rational use of water resources 
and the protection of their ecological quality;                                                                                               
d) establishment of administrative structures for the management of water resources and their 
functions;                                                                                               
e) measures to be taken for efficient reduction of floods and droughts;  
f) monitoring the status of waters, rational use and pollution reduction;  
f) prevention of further deterioration, protection and improvement of banks, terrestrial 
ecosystems and wetlands depended directly on the aquatic ecosystems. 
 
 
Article 4 
Definitions 
 
Under this law the following terms shall have these meanings:  
1. 
"National Environmental Agency” shall be an institution established and functioning pursuant 
to Law “On Environmental Protection”.                                                                                               
2. "Regional Environmental Agency” shall be the respective regional branch of the National 
Environmental Agency.                                                                                               
3. "Aquifer" shall be a subsurface layer or layers of rock or other geological strata of 
sufficient porosity and permeability to allow either a significant flow of groundwater or the 
abstraction of significant quantities of groundwater.                                                                                               
4. "Relevant local government authority” shall be the local government unit, within whose 
territory the water related activity shall take place.                                                                                               
5. “Authorization” shall be the administrative act, recognizing to the holder the right to 
perform one or more activities, pursuant to its stipulated conditions. The authorization form shall be 
specified by a decision of the National Water Council.                                                                                               
6. "Special authorization” shall be the administrative act, recognizing to the holder the right to 
perform a certain activity, pursuant to its stipulated conditions. The authorization form shall be 
specified by a decision of the National Water Council.                                                                                                        
7. 
"River basin" shall be the area of land from which all surface run-off flows through a 
sequence of streams, rivers and possibly lakes, into the sea, a single wide estuary, a delta or another 
river.                                                                                               
8. 
"Banks" shall be the side strips of land along the seas, lakes, reservoirs, lagoons and ponds, 
as well as along the flow of rivers and streams.” 
9. "Water resources” shall be all inland marine waters, territorial waters, the shoreline, 
exclusive economic areas, the continental shelf, surface water and groundwater, as well as water 
bearing strata and atmospheric rainfall, under the jurisdiction and control of the Republic of Albania. 
10. "Geothermal water resources” shall be water with constant higher temperatures than the 
annual average temperatures of the region, under the effect of underground temperatures depending 
on the geological structure, which may contain larger quantities of melted materials and gas than the 
surrounding water resources, where natural water, steam and gas explode or are released by 
underground heat or dry and hot rocks through human modified underground structures.  
11. "Mineral and thermal mineral water resources” shall be hot and cold natural water, which 
are naturally found at different underground depths and under proper geological conditions, and which 
reach the surface of the ground or flow on the surface as one or more springs, defined by their 
minerals or other components in their composition as drinking water, curative waters or other similar 
ones.                                                                                               
 
12. “Water Regulatory Entity (ERRU)” shall be the institution, which acts pursuant to law no. 
8102, dated 28.03.1999 “On the regulatory framework of water supply and wastewater disposal and 
treatment sector”, modified.                                                                                                
 
13. “Eutrophication” shall be the enrichment of water by nutrients, especially by phosphorus 
and nitrogen compounds, causing an accelerated growth of algae and higher form of plant life to 
produce an undesirable disturbance in the balance of organisms present in water and to the quality of 
water concerned. 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 3 ---

 
14. “Water Horizon” shall be a layer under the surface, made from rock or other geological layers, with 
a sufficient porosity and permeability to allow for a considerable flow of groundwater or their departure in 
considerable amounts.                                                                                                
 
15. “The inspectorate responsible for environment” shall be the inspecting authority according 
to the definition provided for under the law for the protection of environment. 
16. “National Cadaster of Water Resources” shall have the public inventory in which all data 
on groundwater and surface water and protected areas are recorded. 
17. “KKU” shall be the National Water Council.                                                                                                
18. "Concession" shall be the agreement between the contracting authority and the 
concessionaire, as defined by Law on concessions and public private partnerships, as amended.  
19. "Discharge controls" shall be controls requiring a specific limitation on water discharge, 
for instance a discharge limit value, or otherwise specifying limits or conditions on the effects, nature 
or other characteristics of a discharge or operating conditions, which affect water discharge. 
20. "Hydrographical border of the drainage basin” shall be the imaginary line, which is 
formed by joining the highest points of the landscape, such as the tops of mountains, hills, crests 
separating valleys from one another, leaving out branches of streams and rivers flowing in opposite 
directions.                                                                                               
21. “Management territorial boundaries” shall be artificial boundaries approved for management 
purposes, which have one or more basins or parts of hydrographical basins. 
22. "Permit” shall be the administrative act, as defined by law on licenses, authorizations and 
permits.                                                                                               
23. "Environmental permit” shall be the environmental permit of type A, B or C as necessary, 
as defined by law on environmental permits. 
24. "License” shall be the administrative act according to the definition stipulated by law on 
licenses, authorizations and permits. 
25. “Law on the protection of the environment” shall be law no 10 431, dated 9.6.2011 “On 
the protection of the environment”, and as it might be amended. 
26. "Lake" shall be a body of standing inland surface water and groundwater.  
27. "River" shall be a body of inland water flowing for the most part on the surface of the 
land, but which may flow underground during a part of its course.  
28. “Responsible minister” shall be the minister covering the scope of activity as defined by 
the legislation in force.                                                                                               
29. Repealed.                                                                                               
30. Repealed.                                                                                               
31. "Environment” shall be the natural components such as air, soil, water, climate, flora and 
fauna in the entirety of their interaction, along with cultural heritage as part of the environment 
created by humans, as defined by law on environmental protection.                                                                                   
32. "Pollutant" shall be any substance liable to cause pollution, according to the definition 
stipulated in the law for environment protection.                                                                                                 
33. “Pollution“ shall be the direct and indirect introduction, as a result of human activity, of 
substances, vibrations, radiations, unpleasant odors, heat or noise into air, water or land, to a scale 
which might prove to be detrimental to the quality of the environment or human health, which might 
lead to the damage of material property or impair or interfere with the amenities and other legitimate 
uses of the environment, according to the definition stipulated in the law for the protection of the 
environment.                                                                                                
34. "Environmental quality standard for water” shall be the concentration of a particular 
pollutant or group of pollutants in water, sediments or biota.                                                                                               
 
35. "Environmental quality standard for groundwater” shall be the environmental, technical 
and health standard expressed as the concentration of a particular pollutant or group of pollutants or as 
an indicator of groundwater pollution. 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 4 ---

36. “Technical standard of discharge on the environment” shall be the limit values and 
concentrations of physical-chemical parameters of industrial wastewater discharge in the public 
sewerage system according to the definition stipulated in the decision no. 1340, dated 11.12.2009 of 
the Council of Ministers “On the approval of the regulation for water supply and sewerage in the 
service area of water supply-sewerage”.                                                                                               
37. "User" shall be any region, municipality, commune, village, organization of water users, 
state or private enterprises, natural or legal persons dealing with exploration, production and use of 
water resources, that discharges, treats or performs any activity in the area of water management 
conform to the legislation in force.                                                                                                
38. “Water use” shall be water services, such as exploration, production, use, discharge of water 
resources as well as treatment or any other activity in the area of water management, having a considerable impact 
on water status.                                                                                                
39. Flood” shall be the temporary covering by water of land not normally covered by water. 
This shall include floods from rivers, mountain torrents, water discharge from dams, ephemeral 
watercourses and floods from the sea in coastal areas, and shall exclude floods from sewerage systems 
of wastewater.  
40. "Good ecological potential" shall be the ecological potential of a heavily modified or an 
artificial body of water when it is classified as “Good” as described in special legal acts.  
 
41. "355-day sustainable flow (Q355)” shall be the flow based on the average daily flows of 
the hydrological study, which does not exceed 355 days in a year. This means that, on the average, the 
natural flow is less than the Q355 value only for 10 days in a year.                                                                                    
 
42. 
“QKB” shall be the National Business Center according to the definition stipulated in 
law no.131/2015 “National Business Center”.                                                                                               
 
43. “National register of licenses, permits and concessions for use of water resources”  shall 
be an integrated portal of electronic data, which is used as a procedural instrument for publications, 
announcements, ensuring transparency in the area of licensing, authorization and issuing of permits. 
 
44. “National register of licenses and permits” shall mean an integrated portal of electronic 
data, which is used as a procedural instrument for publications, announcements and as an official 
electronic archive that ensures transparency in the area of licensing, authorization and issuing of 
permits.                                                                                               
45. “Flood risk” shall be the combination of the probability of a flood with the potential of 
adverse consequences on human health, environment, cultural heritage and economic activity 
that might be associated with the flood.                                                                                                
46. "Minimum ecological flow” shall be the flow regime into the body of surface water, 
riverbed, river basin or coastal area, necessary to preserve the sustainability of the natural ecosystem 
and their benefits.                                                                                                
47. "Servitude" takes the meaning from the provisions set out in the Civil Code of the 
Republic of Albania                                                                                               
48. "Sewerage system” shall be all pipelines, collectors, equipment, facilities and structures to 
the effect of collecting wastewater, pumping stations or pre-treatment of wastewater by local 
government units, which do not include rainwater. Third party installations for wastewater discharge 
shall also be part of the sewerage system, as well as equipment for the installation, extension, 
rehabilitation and maintenance of the system.                                                                                                
49. "Ecological status" shall be an expression of the structural quality and functioning of 
aquatic ecosystems associated with surface water, classified as stipulated in special legal acts.  
50. "Good ecological status" shall be the achieved ecological status of a body of surface 
water when it is classified as “Good” as stipulated in special legal acts 
51. “Good groundwater status” shall be the achieved status by a body of groundwater when 
both its quantitative and its chemical status are evaluated to be at least “as good” as defined in the 
effective legal acts.                                                                                                
52. “Good surface water status” shall be the achieved status by a body of surface water when 
both its ecological and its chemical status are evaluated to be at least “as good” as defined in the 
effective legal acts.                                                                                               
53. “Good groundwater chemical status" shall be the chemical status of a body of 
groundwater, which is evaluated to be at least “as good” as defined in the effective legal acts. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

54. 
“Good surface water chemical status” shall be the chemical status, which is required to 
fulfil the environmental conditions for surface water, as stipulated in the effective legal acts.   
55. “Good quantitative groundwater status” shall be the quantitative status of a body of 
ground water, which is evaluated to be as good as it is stipulated in the effective legal acts.  
56. “Groundwater status” shall be the general expression of the status of a body of 
groundwater, determined by the status referred by the limit standards mentioned above, as defined in 
the effective legal acts.                                                                                                
57. “Surface water status” shall be the general expression of the status of a surface body of 
water determined by its poorest ecological, qualitative and chemical condition.   
58. "Quantitative status" shall be the degree by which a body of groundwater is affected by 
direct or indirect extractions.                                                                                                 
59. "Environmental quality standards" shall be the concentration of particular pollutants or 
group of pollutants in water, sediments or biota, which should not be exceeded with the aim of 
protecting human health and the environment. 
60. "Water Resources Management Agency (AMBU)" shall be the central body responsible 
for integrated management of water resources” 
61. "Polluting agent” shall be any natural or legal person, whose activity, directly or 
indirectly pollutes the environment, in pursuance with the definition set out in law on environmental 
protection                                                                                               
62. “Polluting substances” shall be all substances with a tendency to pollute, 
especially those that are defined as such in specific legal and sublegal acts.  
63. “Priority substances” shall be those substances that include “hazardous priority 
substances”, defined as such in special legal acts, for which special measure need to be taken in order 
to stop or interrupt their discharges, emissions or loss.  
64. “Hazardous Substances” shall be a substance or groups of substances that are toxic, 
persistent and liable to bio-accumulate, and other substances or group of substances which pose a 
similar risk, as defined in the law for the protection of the environment.  
65. "Continental shelf” takes its meaning by the provisions of the Marine Code of the 
Republic of Albania                                                                                               
66. “Water services” shall be those services that provide for individual, public and private 
consumers and business activities, the extraction, storage, preservation, treatment and distribution of 
surface and groundwater, as well as the collection, disposal and treatment of wastewater which is then 
discharged into surface water.                                                                                                
67. “Discharges into water” shall be the discharges in water bodies, including discharges in 
the sewerage network of wastewater and rainwater.  
68. “Industrial discharge” shall be discharges of liquid waste, produced after different 
industrial processes, carrying a risk of contamination or pollution for the environment in which they 
are discharged.                                                                                                
69. "Holder of license, authorization, permit, concession” shall be the legal or natural person, 
who has acquired a license, authorization, permit or concession.                                                                                         
70. “Combined treatment” shall be the control of discharge and flows in surface water 
according to the treatment defined in the special sub-legal acts.                                                                                          
71. “Groundwater body” shall be the geological formation which can carry water up to a 
certain volume and under a certain condition and which makes up an aquifer.  
72. "Artificial water body" shall be a body of surface water created by human activity such as 
a reservoir, storage facility, canal and pond for fish farming                                                                                               
73. "Body of surface water" shall be a discrete and significant element of surface water such 
as a lake, a reservoir, a stream, river or canal, part of a stream, river or canal, a transitional water or a 
stretch of coastal water                                                                                               
74. "Heavily modified water body " shall be a body of surface water, which as a result of 
physical alterations by human activity is substantially changed in its nature as designated in the 
relevant legislation of the competent authority                                                                                                
75. "Drought” shall be a long period of time with flows that are insufficient to meet the needs 
for wat of a category of users.   
76. “Inland marine waters” shall include the waters of marine ports, straits, water in the 
archipelagos, inland seas, aquatic areas between the highest and the lowest tide, and river deltas. 
 
77. "Industrial wastewater" shall be any wastewater, which is discharged from premises used 
for commercial or industrial activity, other than domestic wastewater and run-off rainwater; 
 


--- PAGE 6 ---

78. "Domestic wastewater" shall be wastewater from residential settlements and the services 
sector which originates predominantly from human metabolism and household activities. 
79. "Urban wastewater" shall be domestic wastewater or a mixture of domestic wastewater 
with polluted industrial wastewater and run-off rainwater                                                                                
80. "Territorial waters” shall have the meaning as defined in the provisions of the Marine 
Code of the Republic of Albania.                                                                                                
81. “Used industrial water” shall be water produced by different industrial processes, which 
might carry a risk of contamination or pollution on the environment on which it is discharged.  
  
82. "Drinking water” shall be water intended for human consumption, including as follows: 
 
a) Treated or untreated water, intended for drinking, cooking, food preparation or hygiene, 
regardless of its origin and whether it is supplied from a distribution network, be it private or public, a 
water deposit, tanker, an individual or community well, or packaged in bottles or containers; 
 
b) all water used in food-production companies for the manufacture, processing, preservation 
or marketing of products or ingredients intended for human consumption, as well as all water used for 
cleaning surfaces, objects or materials likely to be in contact with food products;                                                              
 
c) food products with an aquatic origin                                                                                               
 
d) water supplied to be used by people, as part of a public or commercial activity, regardless 
of the average amount of water supplied in a day                                                                                               
 
83. “Coastal waters” shall be surface water located inside an imaginary line, which is 
equidistant in each of its points by 1 mile from the nearest point of the baseline and which is used as a 
point reference in the delineation of territorial waters that eventually extend as far as the external 
border of transitory waters.                                                                                                   
  
84. "Groundwater" shall be all water which is below the surface of the ground or which flow 
directly to the surface of the ground in the form of a natural resource.                                                                                
 
85. "Transboundary waters” shall be any surface water and groundwater, which are located or 
run between the boundaries of two or more states;                                                                                               
 
86. "Inland water" shall be all standing or flowing water on the surface of a terrain, and all 
groundwater on the landward side of the baseline on which the breadth of territorial waters is 
measured;                                                                                               
 
87. "Transitional waters" shall be bodies of surface water in the vicinity of river mouths 
which have a partly saline nature as a result of their proximity to coastal waters but which are mainly 
influenced by freshwater flows;                                                                                               
 
88.  
"Surface water" shall be inland waters, except groundwater; transitional waters, coastal 
waters and territorial waters.                                                                                                
 
89. “Discharge limit values" shall be the mass, expressed in terms of certain specific 
parameters, concentration and/or level of a discharge which may not be exceeded during any one or 
more periods of time.                                                                                               
 
90. “Exclusive economic area” takes its meaning from the provisions stipulated in the 
Marine Code of the Republic of Albania                                                                                               
 
91. “Protected area” shall be every defined area, according to the meaning that it has in the law 
for protected areas. 
 
92. "Special conservation areas” shall be any areas as defined in the law on protected areas. 
  
93.  
"Thermal mineral areas” shall be any area whose borders have been defined in 
accordance with the studies carried out by specialized, national or international institutions in 
conformity with the effective legislation and which contain thermal mineral resources along with 


--- PAGE 7 ---

mineral natural water.                                                                                                
 
94.  
"Flood area” shall be the land on both sides of the riverbanks where temporary floods 
are forecasted to occur.                                                                                               
 
95. "General management, as part of the integrated water resource management cycle", shall 
be the coordination of all state institutions and/or structures whose activity rests on using, distributing, 
protecting, managing, controlling the quality and organizing activities on the coast or on the bed of 
the water resources. 
 
Article 5 
Ownership of water resources 
 
1. Under ownership and management of state bodies shall be:                                                                                 
 
a) all water resources of the Republic of Albania;                                                                                               
 
b) all river beds and banks, streams and other natural flows, both transitional and permanent, 
curative, mineral, thermal mineral and geothermal waters, canals, lakes, ponds, lagoons and natural or 
artificial watersheds, islands as well as sand, stone and silt accumulation on river beds, lakes and 
watersheds, and the geological formations of groundwater;                                                                                               
c) land obtained as a result of water retraction or advances of land towards water, if adjacent 
to any land under state ownership;                                                                                               
d) all hydro technical structures and works developed by the state, such as dams, irrigation, 
draining and sailing systems, drinking water stations and canals, as well as any related works. 
2. The right of state ownership, as defined by paragraph (1) sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), of 
this Article, is irrevocable and inalienable.                                                                                               
Article 6 
 
Principles of Water Resources Integrated Management  
 
1. Water Resources Integrated Management shall be based on the following principles: 
 
a) Respect for the integrity of river basins, based on social and economic demands for water 
resources, by protecting and preserving the quality of these resources and quality of the environment 
for future generations;                                                                                               
b) coordination of public control on water resources through territory planning and social, 
economic development projects, at national and local level;                                                                                               
c) rational use of water resources and control of water discharges;                                                                       
d) Observing the cost recovery principle for water services, including environmental costs in 
accordance with the “polluter pays” principle;                                                                                               
e) Principles of environmental protection, as set out in Law no. 10431, dated 09.06.2011 “On 
Environmental Protection”;                                                                                               
ç) the provision of a sufficient supply of good quality surface water and groundwater as 
needed for sustainable, balanced and equitable use of water;  
f) Taking preventive measures to keep water resources undamaged, as a priority, especially 
at the source.                                                                                               
2. Integrated management of water resources contributes especially towards:   
a) The provision of a sufficient amount of good quality surface water and groundwater, 
necessary for a sustainable, balanced and fair use of water;                                                                                                
b) The significant reduction of pollution in groundwater;                                                                                       
c) The achievement of the objectives, in compliance with relevant international agreements, 
including even those that aim to prevent and end pollution in the marine environment. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
BODIES FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES 
 


--- PAGE 8 ---

Article 7 
National bodies for the administration and management of water resources  
 
1. Central bodies for the administration and management of water resources shall include: 
a) The Council of Ministers;                                                                                               
b) National Water Council;                                                                                               
c) Repealed;                                                                                               
ç) Water Resources Management Agency.                                                                                               
2. Water resource integrated management at basin level shall be the responsibility of: 
a) River basin councils;                                                                                               
b) River basin management offices, AMBU branches.                                                                                
 
Article 8 
Council of Ministers 
 
1. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, shall adopt:  
a) the composition and operational regulation of the National Water Council; 
b) the organization and operation of the Water Resources Management Agency. 
2. The Council of Ministers shall, upon the prior approval of the National Water 
Council and upon the proposal of the Prime Minister:                                                                                               
a) 
adopt the National Water Resources Management Strategy;                                                                       
b) appoint a special committee for the management of transboundary waters; 
c) establish the territorial boundaries of each river basin of the Republic of Albania, as well as 
the center and composition of each council;                                                                                               
ç) adopt the hydrographic boundaries of river basins;                                                                                               
d) adopt the river basin management plans;                                                                                               
dh) define the areas, distances and the width of the shores of water resources.                                               
Article 9                                                                                               
National Water Council 
1. National Water Council shall be the central decision-making body responsible for water 
resource administration.                                                                                               
2. The National Water Council is an inter-ministerial body headed by the Prime minister and 
deals with issues related to water resources integrated management and administration.   
3. The competences of the National Water Council shall be as follows:                                                                    
a) Adopts inter-regional and national plans and projects in the sector of agriculture, urban 
planning, industrial and territorial development, as regards to water conservation and management 
b) takes the necessary measures for the implementation of international agreements and 
conventions on water resources in which Albania is a party;                                                                                               
c) grants permits and authorizations for water use and discharges, when the activity shall be 
performed outside the border of a single basin; 
d) each contracting authority shall, prior to initiating a concession procedure on use of water 
resources, have the approval, in principle, of the National Water Council. Upon the signature of the 
concessionary contract, the concessionary shall be granted with the permission of using water 
resources, signed by the Chair of the National Water Council. When water resources have a national 
significance, according to the designation of the Council of Ministers, the concessionary agreement 
will become effective after the ratification of the agreement by the Parliament.   
e) Approves the regulation of the River basin Council.                                                                                           
4. The acts with a normative nature of the National Water Council shall be published on the 
Official Gazette.                                                                                               
 
Article 10 
Repealed 


--- PAGE 9 ---

Article 11 
Water Resources Management Agency  
1. The Water Resources Management Agency is a governmental legal person, funded by the state 
budget. The AMBU shall be organized on a central level and on a basin level through the river basin 
management offices.                                                                                               
2. The Water Resources Management Agency shall have the following competences: 
a) Designs and implements policies, strategies, plans, programs and projects which aim the 
integrated management of water resources, preservation of their quality and quantity and their 
further consolidation;                                                                                                
b) Applies the provisions of international and transboundary agreements and conventions on 
water resources in which the Republic of Albania is a party;                                                                                       
c) Acts as the Technical Secretariat of the National Water Council;                                                                             
d) proposes to the National Water Council the granting of concessions on water resources; 
e) proposes to the National Water Council the issuance of permits and authorizations on the use of 
water and discharges when the activity is carried out outside the boundary of a single basin; 
f) drafts the national inventory of water resources, both quantitatively and qualitatively 
g)  designs and monitors the implementation of river basin management plans; 
h) designs and monitors the implementation of transboundary water management plans; 
i)  is responsible on the economic activity of water resources; 
j) requests from public bodies and institutions, agencies and public entities, information, technical 
data, analyses or technical-consultative support to address the needs for water resources management and 
administration;                                                                                               
k) encourages the participation of water users in the governance and management of water 
resources;                                                                                               
l) 
fosters research and studies on the development of technical novelties related to the use, 
detection, use, storage, handling, protection, management and efficient use of water resources; 
m)   in cooperation with scientific research institutions identifies the research and study areas for 
water resources and relevant funding for them; 
n) coordinates and controls the work of local water management bodies; 
o) 
Opposes in court the decisions of the National Water Council.                                                                        
 
3. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, shall define other 
competences than those provided for in paragraph (1) of this Article. 
  
Article 12 
River Basin Council 
1. The river basin council shall be the responsible body at local level for integrated water 
resources management in the concerned basin                                                                                               
2. The river basin council shall have the following functions:                                                                                
a) ensures the conservation and a more rational use of water resources within the borders of 
the concerned river basin; 
b) ensures the equitable distribution of water resources within the borders of the concerned 
river basin, in compliance with the goals of use and their effective governance and administration; 
c) ensures the protection of water resources from pollution, misuse and damages that impact 
their quality and quantity;                                                                                               
ç) Identifies the relevant water bodies which need protection. 
3. Repealed. 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 10 ---

Article 13 
River Basin Administration Offices 
1. The River Basin Administration Office shall be the structure depending on AMBU, which 
shall be established and operational at every river basin. 
2. The River Basin Administration Office shall have the following duties: 
a) Designs the project design of water resources for the relevant basin and submits is for the 
approval to the river basin council;                                                                                                
b) Designs the inventory of water resources regarding both quality and quantity, and updates 
it periodically; 
 
 
c) promotes the participation of water users in the governance and administration of water 
resources;                                                                                               
 
d) compiles reports, provides suggestions on water resources and submits them for follow-up to 
the river basin council;                                                                                               
ç) prepares materials for the meetings of the river basin council;                                                                           
 
e) monitors the implementation of the decisions of the National Water Council and the river 
basin council.                                                                                               
 
CHAPTER III                     
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT 
SECTIONI 1 
 
THE DIVISION OF THE TERRITORY FOR WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT  
 
Article14 
River basins 
 
1. The Territory of the Republic of Albania, for purposes of the water resources management, 
shall be divided into river basins.                                                                                                 
2. Groundwater, when not following completely a certain river basin, shall be identified as 
belonging to the nearest river basin.                                                                                                
3. Coastal waters shall be identified as belonging to the nearest river basin. 
 
SECTION 2 
 
PLANNING DOCUMENTS FOR WATER RESOURCEs MANAGEMENT 
 
Article 15 
Policies 
Policies represent the highest level of planning and integrated management of water resources. 
These documents contain:  
a) the planning and development goals of water resource management, in line with the 
economic, demographic, social, environmental, cultural and historical development;  
b) measures for implementation;                                                                                               
c) necessary work plan and budget for its implementation.                                                                                      
Article 16 
National Water Resources Management Strategy 
1. National Water Resources Management Strategy is a planning document which defines the 
vision of state policies, the mission, the aims and objectives in the area of integrated water 
management on a long-term.                                                                                                
2. National Water Resources Management Strategy shall be based on scientific researches, 
constant monitoring of the situation and phenomena related to water and its use, by observing water 
specific problems and integrated protection of the environment in any river basin. 


--- PAGE 11 ---

3. The National Water Resources Management Strategy is the framework document for 
water management, for the development of plans and other strategic documents in the area of 
territorial planning, environmental protection, biological diversity and landscape, agriculture, forestry, 
fishery, transport, tourism, public health and consists of other relevant documents. 
4. The National Water Resources Management Strategy shall be reviewed every 15 years. 
The Strategy may be reviewed and updated even before the termination of this term, when dictated by 
changes in the water system and the economic and social development of the country. 
5. Specialized bodies, entities and institutions in the water sector shall develop the National 
Water Resources Management Strategy under the guidance and supervision of AMBU. 
6. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, and the preliminary 
approval of the National Water Council, adopts the requirements for the content, development and 
implementation of the National Water Resources Management Strategy. 
 
Article 17 
River Basin Management Plans 
 
1. River basin management plans shall be designed in compliance with the National Water 
Resources Management Strategy and are implemented for a certain territory and period.   
2. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, and the preliminary 
approval of the National Water Council, shall adopt the requirements for the content, development 
and implementation of river basin management plans.                                                                                               
3. The river basin management plans shall be revised every six years.  
 
Article 18 
International Cooperation 
 
1. The Republic of Albania shall conclude agreements with neighboring countries, for the 
purpose of establishing and promoting cooperation between these countries for the protection of 
transboundary waters, to the effect of strengthening national and bilateral actions, as well as 
preventing the pollution of water resources.                                                                                                
2.  Transboundary cooperation aims at protecting transboundary waters in their natural 
condition, ensuring appropriate conditions for development of life and its ecosystems by promoting 
useful activities in compliance with the requirements of the sustainable development principle. 
 
Article 19 
Implementation of International Agreements, Conventions and Protocols 
 
1. All legal and sublegal acts in force with regard to environmental protection in the 
 
Republic of Albania shall apply for the protection of the natural status of transboundary 
waters, along with the international agreements, conventions and protocols, in which Albania is a 
party.                                                                                               
2. Transboundary waters shall be used only in a controlled way and within scientifically 
defined borders, without damaging natural conditions and their biological and ecological equilibrium. 
3. Natural or legal persons, be them nationals or internationals, who use the aquatic, natural 
and biological attributes of water resources or perform different related activities on them, shall be 
obliged to protect transboundary waters from liable damages, and observe the provisions of this law. 
4. Concerned entities shall compile a detailed report of the effect on aquatic environment to 
obtain an environmental permit for projects and activities they request to perform on transboundary 
waters.                                                                                               
 
Article 20 
Measures for the protection of transboundary waters 
 
The Water Resources Management Agency, in collaboration with the relevant 
ministries, shall coordinate the work for the protection of transboundary waters, control the 
implementation of the requirements of this law and participate in the:  
: 


--- PAGE 12 ---

a) Design and implementation of transboundary waters management plans; 
b) Design and implementation of special monitoring programs; 
c) Design and implementation of plans for the rehabilitation of damaged and polluted 
transboundary water areas;                                                                                               
d) Development of an up to date legal framework for the administration and protection of 
water resources;                                                                                                
ç) provision and productive use of the needed financial tools; 
e) Constant control to ensure the protection of natural conditions of fauna and flora in 
transboundary waters.                                                                                               
 
Article 21 
Transboundary Waters Administration and Management 
 
1. The management of transboundary waters shall be carried out by the AMBU, based on 
transboundary waters management plans, adopted by the Council of Ministers. 
2. Transboundary waters management plans shall consist of the: 
a) repealed;                                                                                               
b) objectives of transboundary waters management;                                                                                               
c) identified tasks for different governmental bodies, research institutions and environmental 
organizations concerning the protection and management of transboundary waters;  
d) measures to prevent or reduce the identified threats                                                                                           
e) conditions for scientific research, inventorying and monitoring;                                                                        
f) other special conditions;                                                                                               
g) program of measures for the implementation of these plans. 
 
Article 22 
Special Commissions for Transboundary Waters Management 
 
1. Special commissions shall be set up for transboundary waters protection and 
administration. Their composition, responsibilities and tasks shall be regulated by special legal and 
sub-legal acts.                                                                                                
2. Upon the proposal of the Prime Minister and prior approval of the Water National 
Council, the Council of Ministers shall appoint a special commission in charge of transboundary 
water management, and the administration of relations with border states for these waters conform to 
the Albanian legislation and other relevant international agreements. 
 
  Article 23 
Repealed 
 
Article 24 
 
The details of the river basin strategy and management plan  
 
The National Water Resource Management Strategy and management plan of the river basin 
comprises as follows:                                                                                                  
a) The environmental objectives, referred to in article 25 of this law; 
b) The chemical and ecological parameters for surface water, as defined in this law; 
c) The chemical and quantitative parameters of groundwater, as defined in this law; 
d) The conditions for designating heavily modified water bodies as referred to in article 27 
in this law;                                                                                                
e) The technical specifications and standardized methods regarding the monitoring program, 
as defined in this law; 
f) Technical specifications analyzing the characteristics of river basins, referred to in article 
37 in this law;                                                                                               
g) the content of the program of measures, referred to in article 37 in this law; 
h) The conditions and relevant measures on planning flood risk management, referred by 
articles 68 and 69 in this law;                                                                                               
i) every other issue which is related to the implementation of the river basin strategy and 
management plan.                                                                                                
 


--- PAGE 13 ---

 
Section 3 
Water Classification 
 
Article 25 
Environmental Objectives 
 
1. Environmental objectives for bodies with surface water and groundwater and for protected 
areas shall be set with the aim of preventing the deterioration of water bodies and the protection, 
increase and rehabilitation of all water bodies, both surface water and groundwater.   
2. The environmental objectives, mentioned in point 1 of this article, shall be defined by 
taking into consideration their chemical, ecological and quantitative status.  
3. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime minister, shall approve of the 
criteria for setting the environmental objectives.                                                                                               
Article 26 
Water classification 
 
1. Surface water, with the aim of protecting and improving the status of the water, shall be 
classified according to their chemical and ecological status.  
2. Groundwater, with the aim of protecting and improving the status of the water, shall be 
classified according to their chemical and quantitative status. 
3. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime minister, and after the 
preliminary approval by the National Water Council, shall designate waters according to their 
classification.                                                                                                
4. The National Water Council, upon the proposal of the river basin council and specialized 
scientific institutions responsible for ground water and surface water, in conformity with the 
specifications of this article, shall designate artificial or heavily modified bodies of water and 
announces them in the Official Journal.                                                                                                 
5. Water bodies, based on the classification of their waters, shall be components of the river 
basin management plan. 
 
Article 27 
Heavily modified water bodies 
 
1. The National Water Council, with the proposal of the Water Resource Management Agency, 
and in conformity with the specifications of this law, shall have the competence to:  
a) Designate certain bodies of water as artificial or heavily modified, when the environmental 
objectives that are related to their good statures or good ecological potential cannot be achieved 
because that might be technically impossible or entails very high costs;  
b) extend the deadlines for achieving the environmental objectives, on condition that no 
further deterioration takes place on the affected status of the water body;    
c) set specific environmental objectives for certain water bodies, when they are heavily 
affected by human activity or when their natural conditions are such that make it impossible to 
achieve the overall environmental objectives or when the associated costs are too high.  
2. The National Water Council, upon the proposal of the river basin council, shall determine 
appropriate measures for preventing the deterioration of the status of the body designated as a heavily 
modified water body.                                                                                               
3. Every designation made according to this article and the relevant reasons shall be defined 
in the river basin management plan.                                                                                                
4. Designations made in conformity with this article shall be reviewed every six years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---

 
 
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
Section 1 
Water Standards 
Article 28 
Environmental quality standards for water resources 
 
1. 
The environmental quality standards for waters shall be defined in conformity with the 
requirements of the law for the protection of the environment, with the aim of preventing the 
deterioration of water quality.                                                                                               
2. 
Environmental quality standards for waters shall be set for all waters, including 
groundwater. 
3. 
Environmental quality standards for waters shall be set for all water resources or by 
referring to: 
a) the actual or potential use which every water body is subjected to; 
b) activities that are normally carried out or are being carried out on such water bodies; 
c) those water bodies which require protection to be able to withstand certain activities; 
4. 
The Water Resources Management Agency shall identify the water bodies, referred to in 
point 3 of this article, according to the respective procedure and within time limits determined by the 
National Water Council. 
 
Article 29 
Technical standards of water discharge into the environment  
 
The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Minister responsible for the environment, 
shall approve the technical standards of discharge into the environment for water, hazardous 
substances, other substances and parameters, in accordance with the requirements of the law on 
environmental protection, in order to prevent deterioration of water quality and protect the 
environment.  
                                                                                               
 
Article 30 
Industrial discharge and their treatment 
1. 
River basin administration offices, in cooperation with the regional environmental 
agencies, shall prepare programs to prevent and avoid the pollution of receiving water resources from 
liquid discharges under their jurisdiction.                                                                                               
2. Discharge of industrial wastewater into the environment must be carried out in full 
compliance with the general and specific requirements for different types of activities that require that 
liquid be discharged in the environment, in order to protect groundwater or surface water from 
contamination or pollution.                                                                                               
3. Management of industrial wastewater should be carried out by entities that produce and 
discharge them in in accordance with the “polluter pays” principle.  
4. Management of industrial wastewater shall include their partial or complete treatment, 
near the area where the entity producing them is located or in a specific industrial area. Liquid, after 
treatment in wastewater treatment plants, can be discharged upon payment of a fee and in accordance 
with the quality standards for these waters.                                                                                               
5. The tariffs for liquid discharges, produced from treatment of industrial wastewater, shall be 
set based on the amount of discharge and their chemical composition. 
6. Wastewater that does not meet the characteristics set out in the bylaws shall not be allowed 
to be discharged directly into the earth, water and the public sewerage system. 
7. Monitoring of the quality and quantity of produced industrial wastewater and relevant 
discharges into surface water or groundwater after treatment should be carried out by bodies 
designated by special laws, under the general management of AMBU (as part of the integrated water 
resources management cycle).                                                                                               


--- PAGE 15 ---

 
 
 
 
Article 31 
Drinking water quality 
 
The Minister responsible for health, in cooperation with the Water Resources Management 
Agency, shall determine the quality requirements for drinking water.                                                                     
 
1/1. The Council of Ministers, upon proposal of the minister responsible for health, shall 
adopt the quality requirements for drinking water. 
1. Any natural or legal person, public or private, offering or publicly selling drinking water, 
shall be equipped with the relevant permit or authorisation, and fulfil drinking the water quality 
requirements, in conformity with the effective legal acts.                                                                                               
2. Local government units and any other institution, both public and private, with their own 
water supply system shall be obliged to take measures to control the quality of supplied water on 
regular basis.                                                                                               
3. The Minister responsible for health, in cooperation with the central institution responsible 
for supplying water to the population, through the inspectorate responsible for healthcare, shall order 
the termination of drinking water supply if it does not meet quality standards. This process shall run 
under the overall management of the Water Resources Management Agency, as part of the integrated 
water resources management cycle.                                                                                                
 
Section 2 
Pollution control 
 
Article 32 
Combined treatment 
 
1. Control of pollution is based on the principle of combined treatment and aims to prevent 
deterioration, and encourage the increase and restoration to a normal condition of surface water 
bodies.                                                                                                 
2. Pollution shall be controlled by applying relevant limit discharge values, based on best 
available techniques or on best environmental practices when influences are spread out.  
3. More detailed and complete controls on discharges shall be carried out, as needed, when 
an environmental objective or environmental water quality standard requires more specific conditions 
than those stipulated in point 1 of this article.                                                                                               
 
Article 33 
Environmental permissions 
 
Every natural and legal person, exercising an activity, which causes polluted waters to be 
discharge in water bodies, should have the relevant environmental permission in conformity with the 
requirements of the law for environmental permissions.                                                                                               
 
Article 34 
Protected areas 
 
1. In conformity to this law and other legal and sub-legal acts, protected areas shall be 
designated with the purpose of protecting water and aquatic ecosystems and shall include special 
protecting measures.                                                                                               
2. Protected areas shall include:                                                                                               
a) hygiene and sanitation areas for the protection of water resources, designated for the 
production of drinking water                                                                                               
b) protected areas, as defined by the law on protected areas; 
c) fishing and shellfish farming areas in conformity to the legislation on fishing; 
d) thermal bath areas for curative treatment and recreation; 


--- PAGE 16 ---

e) areas subject to eutrophication and areas at risk from nitrates and nitrites;  
f) designated areas for the protection of plants or animals, along with the habitats, where 
conservation and enhancement of the status of the water is a significant element for their 
protection;                                                                                               
3. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the Ministry responsible 
for protected environmental areas, shall identify the protected areas according to paragraph (2) of this 
article.                                                                                               
4. Upon the proposal of the Minister responsible for the protected environmental areas, the 
Council of Ministers shall designate the protected areas as specified in paragraph (2) of this Article. 
5. The Water Resources Management Agency and river basin administration offices shall 
develop, manage and update the inventory of protected areas, as a component of the protected areas 
management plan.                                                                                               
6. The protected area management plan shall be included in the respective river basin 
management plan.                                                                                               
 
Article 35 
Protection of Pollution-Prone Areas 
 
1. Minister responsible for the environment, in collaboration with the Water Resource 
Management Agency, shall draft and submit for approval to the National Water Council the relevant 
sublegal acts for designation of areas vulnerable to contamination from harmful substances or 
elements, such as nitrates, phosphates, products for plant protection and biocides. 
2. The minister responsible for environment, in cooperation with Water Resources 
Management Agency, the minister responsible for agriculture and the minister responsible for 
economy and the minister responsible for health, shall issue regulations, which define the 
programmes, measures and other relevant obligations, with the aim of reducing and preventing the 
contamination of water from hazardous substances, as defined in paragraph (1) of this Article, apart 
from what is caused or derived by other agricultural activities.                                                                                           
3. Combined treatment, as defined in article 32 of this law, shall apply to discharges from the 
distribution points and sources in the areas defined in point 1 of this article. 
 
 
Section 3                                                                                               
 
Measures for the protection of water resources  
 
Article 36                                                                                               
Characteristics of river basins 
 
1. The Water Resource Administration Office shall conduct for each relevant river basin the 
assessment of human impact on the status of surface and groundwater, the economic analysis of water 
use, and the analyses after monitoring conducted by entities contracted by the responsible ministry for 
the environment.                                                                                                 
  
2. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Minister responsible for the 
environment, shall determine by sub-legal act the technical specifications necessary for the 
performance of analyses and reviews, as defined in point 1 of this article.                                                                          
 
3. The analyses and assessments set out in this Article shall be carried out after the approval 
of the river basin management plans and shall be regularly updated.                                                                                   
 
Article 37 
Measure programs for environmental objectives                                                                     
 
1. The Water Resources Management Agency and the River Basin Administration Office, in 
order to achieve the environmental objectives set out in Article 25 of this law, shall draft the program 
of measures for the river basin, taking into account the results of the analyses, as defined in Article 36. 
of this law                                                                                               
2. The river basin program of measures shall be reviewed every six years, and, if necessary, 
updated.  
3. The National Water Council, on the proposal of the respective basin council, approves the 


--- PAGE 17 ---

program of measures drafted by the River Basin Administration Office 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V        
USE OF WATER RESOURCES  
Article 38 
The purposes of using water resources 
 
Water resources shall be used for:                                                                                               
 
a) domestic, municipal, agricultural purposes, including irrigation and water for livestock; 
b) aquaculture, water and industrial transportation, hydropower production; 
c) commerce;                                                                                               
ç) tourism, entertainment, including sailing for entertainment;                                                                                  
d) other purposes, approved by the National Water Council.                                                                                   
 
Article 39                                                                                               
Use of water resources                                                                                          
 
1. Use of natural water resources shall be subject to both administrative controls by water 
resources administration and management bodies and inspections by inspectors responsible for 
controlling activities that use water resources, under the general management of AMBU, as part of the 
integrated water resources management cycle.                                                                                                
2. Every water user shall be obliged to allow for a minimum ecological flow in the natural 
flow and not include the former in the amount of water that is authorized to use. 
3. The amount of minimum ecological flow for each natural water body shall be determined 
according to the basin management plans and other legal and sub-legal acts, based on the specific 
characteristics and natural and ecological values of the river basin.                                                                                    
4. Regardless of the amount of ecological flow specified in the basin management plans, it 
cannot be less than the 355-day sustainable flow (Q355)                                                                                               
 
Article 40 
Free use of water resources 
 
1. Everyone has the right to use freely surface water resources for drinking and other 
domestic and livestock needs, not exceeding the needs and as such using as much water as it is 
necessary to meet the individual and domestic needs of the user and in accordance with the relevant 
laws and plans of the basin councils.                                                                                                
2. Everyone has the right to use freely coastal waters for bathing and water sports. 
3. Everyone has the right to use water resources for fire suppression. 
4. Everyone has the right to use rainwater that falls on private property, on condition that it is 
not being collected by artificial installations.                                                                                                
5. Water resources management bodies have the right to restrict the free use of water during 
periods of water scarcity and droughts or when water quality is impaired, water-borne diseases are 
spreading or at risk of spreading all over the country or in specific areas. 
 
Article 41 
Water use by permission 
 
1. Based on the administrative permit issued by the water resources administration and 
management bodies, the following activities can be performed within the territory of the Republic of 
Albania:                                                                                               
a) Use of water, when used by permanent installations. 
b) Irrigation.                                                                                               


--- PAGE 18 ---

c) Industrial use of surface water.                                                                                               
d) Water for pools                                                                                               
e) Packaged water.                                                                                               
f) Curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and geothermal 
waters.                                                                                               
g) 
Use of groundwater for different purposes.                                                                                               
h) 
Granting use of water resources for the development of aquaculture. 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 19 ---

2. Relevant permission from the National Water Council shall be required for the following 
uses:                                                                                                 
a) Sailing                                                                                               
b) Construction of anchoring structures, defending coastal facilities and artificial Sea Islands.  
c) Use of marine waters for hydropower production. 
3. The Council of Ministers, upon the preliminary approval of the National Water Council, 
and upon the proposal of the Prime minister, approves the submitted request form for permitting use 
of water resources.                                                                                               
 
Article 42 
Use of water with authorization 
 
1. The following activities can be performed only after relevant entities are provided with an 
authorization by the water resources administration and management bodies: 
a) giving water to livestock when this is followed by the installation of pipes and construction 
of facilities;                                                                                               
b) Use of groundwater for domestic purposes;                                                                                               
c) Use or reuse of wastewater even when applied in the ground.                                                                             
2. Use of water resources for fishing purposes and activities shall be regulated by laws and 
bylaws governing these activities.                                                                                               
3. All types of research, studies and explorations on surface and groundwater, even when 
they do not have water as their object, shall be carried out with authorization from relevant water 
bodies for an area and for a certain period of time. 
4. This requirement does not apply to monitoring institutions of ground and surface water, 
and to scientific institutions, which activities do not affect the deterioration of water qualitative and 
quantitative equilibriums.    
5. 
The Council of Ministers, upon the preliminary approval of the National Water Council 
and the proposal of Prime Minister, shall approve the request form for authorization of water resource 
use.                                                                                                
 
Article 43 
Concession granting for water resource use 
 
1. Granting of concessions for use of water resources shall be determined by the law for 
concessions and public-private partnership and the sublegal acts, which have requirements and 
procedures for granting of concessions.                                                                                                
2. The contracting body of national water resources management shall be responsible for the 
register of concessions. This register shall be administered and maintained by the relevant contracting 
body, according to the requirements of the law on archives.                                                                                                
Article 44 
Use of solid materials                                                                                            
 
1. Water resources management bodies shall issue administrative permits for the use of solid 
materials, such as sand, gravel, extracted from the beds of rivers, streams, lakes with or without water, 
only if the legal conditions and criteria set by the acts of the National Water Council are fulfilled.  
2. The Council of Ministers, upon the prior approval by the National Water Council and on 
the proposal of the Prime Minister, shall approve the application form for a permit and renewal for the 
use of solid materials on riverbeds.                                                                                               
Article 45 
The tasks of water users 
Water users should:                                                                                               
a) Use water in a rational and economic way;                                                                                               
b) observe the conditions and obligations set on the right of using water; 
c) observe the conditions and obligations set on the right of ownership; 
d) secure protection of water from pollution, keep under control water quality and protect the 
environment from different polluters;                                                                                               
e) observe the rights of other legal users of waters and third parties. 
                                                                                               


--- PAGE 20 ---

 
 
Article 46 
Drought and lack of water 
 
The National Water Council, in a situation of drought or lack of water, shall issue a decision 
on taking necessary measures to address the drought, which is then published in the Official Journal. 
The decision determines:                                                                                                
a) the limitations in some or in all of the activities that entail use of water resources;  
b) a limitation in the use of water, in compliance with the licenses, authorizations, permissions 
and concessions on water use;                                                                                               
 
Article 47 
Water bodies used as drinking water  
 
1. 
The River Basin Administration Office for the respective river basin must especially 
identify:                                                                                               
a) all water bodies intended for human consumption, yielding on average 10 m³ of water per 
day or supplying more than 50 people;                                                                                               
b) all water bodies intended for such future uses;                                                                                               
2. 
The River Basin Council and the relevant water resources administration and management 
bodies shall ensure the protection of water resources referred to in this Article, in order to 
avoid deterioration of their quality and provide them with the necessary treatment so that 
drinking water is obtained.                                                                                                
3. Repealed                                                                                               
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
THE SOURCES OF CURATIVE, MINERAL, THERMO-MINERAL AND GEOTHERMAL 
WATERS                                                                                               
 
Article 48 
Management of natural sources of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and geothermal 
waters                                                                                               
 
1. Integrated management of the natural resources of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and 
geothermal waters is about creating a framework for the protection of these resources with the aim of: 
a) monitoring the quality of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and geothermal waters by the 
ministry, the ministry responsible for health and the ministry responsible for the economy; 
b) promoting the rational and sustainable use of these waters, which is done based done based 
on long-term protection of natural resources of curative, mineral, thermos-mineral and geo-thermal 
waters;                                                                                               
c) reducing progressively pollution of natural resources of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral 
and geothermal waters, in order to prevent their further pollution; 
d) prohibiting constructions near the areas with natural resources of curative, mineral, 
thermo-mineral and geothermal waters without the permission of the water resources management 
bodies;                                                                                               
e) preventing discharges on land, water and the public sewerage system of curative, mineral, 
thermo-mineral and geothermal waters be it used or untreated. 
f) assessing the causes of pollution of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and geothermal 
waters;                                                                                               
g)  drafting a management plan for curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and geothermal waters 
by water resources management bodies;                                                                                               
h) controlling the areas near the natural resources of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and 
geothermal waters which is performed by water resources management bodies; 
i)  prohibiting the modification of the intended use of curative, mineral, thermo-mineral and 
geothermal waters; 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 21 ---

j) Prohibiting drillings and interventions in the area with natural resources of curative, 
thermal, thermos-mineral and geothermal waters;                                                                                               
k) Prohibition of suction with pumps of curative, thermal, thermo-mineral and geothermal 
waters directly from the mouth of the spring.                                                                                               
2. Every natural or legal person, who uses the natural resources of curative, mineral, thermo-
mineral and geothermal waters, must obtain a permit from the water resources management bodies, 
which is awarded in accordance with the management plan of these waters. 
3. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Prime minister, approves the tariffs for 
using the curative, thermo-mineral and geothermal waters.                                                                                               
 
Article 49 
Suspension and temporary change of permit conditions for natural resources of curative, mineral, 
thermos-mineral and geothermal waters                                                                                               
 
1. The permission can be changed, suspended or repealed when its relevant authority does 
not fulfill the criteria for obtaining the permit or it has violated the obligations that it entails. 
2. Conditions shall be modified and permit might be suspended or repealed as needed by the 
body which has issued the permit or the highest ruling body:                                                                                              
a) changes have occurred because of force majeure;                                                                                               
b) upon the request of the holder of the permit;                                                                                               
c) conditions have not been observed by the holder of the permit;                                                                         
d) curative, mineral and thermal waters the permission is related to have not been used 
according to term defined in the respective permission; 
e) death of the natural person or termination of the legal status. 
 
CHAPTER VII 
AUTHORISATIONS, PERMITS AND CONCESSIONS ON USING WATER RESOURCES 
Article 50                                                                                               
Water Resources administration and management bodies competent for granting of 
permits, authorizations and concessions                                                                                               
1. Water resources administration and management bodies shall grant authorisations, permits 
and conclude concession contracts for the use of waters, based on the principles of proportionality, 
efficiency and de-bureaucratization, to reduce administrative barriers and in compliance with the 
procedures defined by a special law or by decision of the Council of Ministers in pursuance of this 
chapter.                                                                                               
2. The river basin council shall issue authorisations and permits when the activity shall take 
place within the territory of the Republic of Albania and within the borders of a single basin 
3. The National Water Council shall issue permits and authorisations when the activity shall 
take place within the territory of the Republic of Albania but in an area that is beyond the borders of a 
basin.                                                                                               
4. The Water Resource Management Agency shall identify the concessionaire project based 
on the classification of water resources, river basin management plan and in conformity to the 
procedures, criteria and conditions set out in legal and sub-legal acts. 
5. Authorisations, permits and concessions for water use:  
a) shall be personal and belong to the holder of the relevant licence, authorisation, permit and 
concession;                                                                                                
b) shall not be transferred without the approval of water resources administration and management 
authorities;                                                                                               
c) shall be valid for a certain period of time and shall be renewed according to a defined 
procedure; 
d)  shall be changed, refused, suspended or repealed on the basis of this law and sub-legal acts 
in pursuance of the former; 
e) shall be issued upon payment of a fee for administrative costs; 
f) shall be registered in the National Register of Permits and Authorisations in conformity to the 
relevant legal and sub-legal provisions;  
g) shall not be refused without a justified decision of the administrative body examining the request 
for authorisation or permit. 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 22 ---

6. In pursuance of this law and the law on licenses, authorisations and permits, the Council of Ministers 
shall determine the:                                                                                               
a) special conditions for obtaining a licence, authorization and permission and the necessary 
accompanying documents that shall be submitted for this purpose;                                                                                               
b) validity period of the license, authorization and permission;                                                                               
c) procedures and deadlines for administrative examination and decision making; 
d)  procedures of repeal by the administrative bodies.                                                                                             
 
Article 51 
General principles for granting authorization, permissions and concessions  
 
An authorization, permission or concession shall be issued only if:                                                                          
 
a) the activity of the natural or legal person, who is the holder of the authorisation, permit or 
concession does not have a negative impact on water use;                                                                                               
b) complies with the relevant river basin management plan;                                                                                    
c) does not lead to the violation of water quality standards set out in this law;                                                         
ç) does not affect the relevant environmental objectives set out in this law;                                                            
d) does not have a conflict with the programme of measures set out in accordance with this law. 
 
Article 52 
Priorities in granting of permits, authorizations and concessions 
 
The relevant water resources administration and management bodies shall be based on the following 
priorities for granting permits, authorisations and concessions:                                                                                               
a) water supply to the population including the demands of the industries within the 
borderline of residential areas and with a low level of consumption;                                                                                    
b) uses of water for irrigation, agriculture and aquaculture;                                                                                    
c) uses for hydropower generation;                                                                                               
d)  other industrial uses, which are not included in the above-mentioned categories, including 
uses in mines;                                                                                               
e) fishing;                                                                                               
f)  water transportation;                                                                                               
g) entertainment and tourism, including recreational sailing;                                                                                  
h) other uses                                                                                                
Articles 53 
General conditions for authorizations, permissions and 
concessions and their use  
 
1. 
The authorisation, permit or concession contract for the use of waters shall contain the 
following general data:                                                                                                
a) the series number, number and date of approval and date of becoming effective; 
b) data for the identification of the holder;                                                                                               
c) type of activity allowed and the purpose water is going to be used;                                                                     
ç) quantity of water that might be used, referring either to an exact amount or to part of a flow;  
d) volume of return flow, if there is one, and where the return flow will be discharged; 
e)  the surface area of the land related to water use when the latter is used for irrigation;                                                          
f) place where activity is to be carried out, action taken or public good used; 
g) restrictions on the activity taking place, action taken or use of public good; 
h) validity period of the license, authorization or concession.  


--- PAGE 23 ---

 
2. The license, authorisation, permit or concession contract shall contain by all means the 
following general conditions, based on which the operator shall be obliged to: 
a) use water rationality by avoiding waste and without affecting the environment; 
b) use water only for the purposes that the licence, authorisation, permit or concessionaire 
contract has been granted;                                                                                                
c) pay all costs, taxes and fees related to water use;                                                                                               
d)  install or allow the installation of equipment for measuring the quantity of used water, in 
conformity to the requirements defined by the relevant body, which has issued the permit, 
authorisation or concession;                                                                                                
e) register the volume of used water, including the return flow; 
f) provide data and information on water use whenever requested by bodies responsible for 
water resources management.                                                                                                
3. The special conditions, accompanying documents, validity periods and the examination 
and decision-making procedures shall be determined by decision of the Council of Ministers. 
4. The licence and permit granted by central or independent institutions shall become 
effective upon its publication in the Register of Licences and Permits, unless the effective act of 
approval shall be related to the publication in the Official Journal. 
5. Water use permits shall be included under the relevant category of licenses, authorizations 
and permits.                                                                                               
 
Article 54 
Suspension and temporary change of the conditions of permits, authorizations and concessions 
 
1. The authorisation, permit and concession shall be suspended or changed when its holder 
shall not fulfil the award criteria for this entitlement or violates its obligations defined within. 
2. The issuing body shall suspend and change the conditions of licences, authorisations, 
permits and concessions:                                                                                               
a) because of an order for drought issued in conformity with this law;                                                                   
b) when changes have taken place as a result of force majeure;                                                                               
c) upon the request of the holder of the entitlement;                                                                                               
ç) when the holder fails to observe the conditions of the authorisation, permit or concession. 
 
Article 55 
Cancellation, repeal of authorizations and permits and termination of the concession contract 
 
1. The dissolution of the concession contract and repeal or cancellation of authorisations and 
permits may be done when:                                                                                               
a) based on public interest and in accordance with the river basin management plan, use of 
water is essential for another primary purpose, conform to the classifications, according to the 
priorities set out in article 52 of this Law;                                                                                               
b) the holder of the authorisation, permit and concession does not adhere to the relevant 
conditions even after the suspension of the authorisation or permit for a certain period of time; 
c) upon the request of the holder of the authorisation, permit and concession; 
d) waters, for which the authorisation or concession has been granted, have not been used for 
three years;                                                                                               
e) holder has passed away or the legal person has terminated.                                                                                
f) it is stipulated in the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Code. 
2. The legislation in force on concessions shall be applicable for complaints against the award 
concession procedures and the dissolution of the concession contract 
3. The decisions of the water resources management bodies for the dissolution or cancellation 
of the authorization/permit can be contested in the competent court, according to the legislation in 
force.                                                                                                
4. Repealed.                                                                                               
5. The legislation in force on concessions shall be applicable for complaints against the 
award of concession procedures and the dissolution of the concession contract. 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 24 ---

 
Article 56 
Professional Drillers 
 
1. A professional water driller, who carries out business on a commercial basis, must have 
the relevant license, according to the provisions of the law on licenses, authorizations and permits.  
2. Water resources management bodies shall issue the drilling permit after the professional 
driller has submitted the drilling technical and hydrogeological project drafted by licensed legal 
entities, pursuant to the legislation in force.                                                                                                
3. Not any later than one month following termination of drilling, the professional driller 
shall submit to the water resources administration bodies, in two copies, a detailed hydrogeological 
report in relation to drilling, along with the drilled strata samples, as well as relevant documentation, 
the initial drilling project and the report after the completion of drilling. The water resources 
administration bodies shall send a copy to the Central Geological Archive.                                                                        
4. The Albanian Geological Service shall provide to the water resources management bodies 
relevant information in relation to the hydrogeological projects and the drilling reports submitted by 
the entities to this institution.                                                                                                
5. The permit for water extraction shall be issued by water resources management authorities, 
after the professional driller has submitted the technical and hydrogeological report for the potential 
use of the well, drafted by licensed legal entities conform to the legislation in force.  
6. The drilling activity for water extraction by natural, legal subjects or unlicensed individuals 
shall not be permitted without the relevant drilling permit issued by the water resources management 
bodies.                                                                                               
 
CHAPTER VIII                                                                                               
PROTECTED AREAS AND ZONES                                                                               
 
Article 57                                                                                               
Hygiene and Sanitary Protection Zones                                                                             
 
1. Hygiene and sanitary protection zones shall be designated around surface and 
groundwater resources supplying the urban and rural population with water, to preserve water quality 
near the source. 
1/1. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the ministry responsible 
for environmental protected areas, the ministry responsible for health and the ministry responsible for 
water supply and sewerage infrastructure and the Albanian Geological Survey, shall define the 
protection boundaries of hygienic-sanitary zones.                                                                                               
2. Upon the proposal of the minister responsible for environment, the minister responsible for 
economy, the minister responsible for healthcare and the minister responsible for water supply and 
sewerage infrastructure, the Council of Ministers shall adopt the borders of these areas. 
3. Hygiene and sanitary protection zones shall consist of:                                                                                         
a) the primary protection zone around the source controlled by the operator extracting, 
producing and distributing drinking water. This area shall be encircled;                                                                             
b)  the near protection zone, where constructions, industrial development, agricultural and 
livestock related activities, well drilling, digging of ditches, storage or discharge of waste, wastewater, 
chemical or toxic substances, use of chemical waste and pesticides, construction of burial sites or 
burial of dead animals shall be prohibited;                                                                                               
c) the distant protection area, where the activities set out in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph 
shall be subject to special administrative authorisations.                                                                                               
d) Natural and legal persons whose interests are affected by the designation of hygiene and 
sanitation protection areas shall be compensated in conformity to the Civil Code of the Republic of 
Albania.                                                                                               
 
Article 58 
Protection of pollution prone areas 
1. With the aim of protecting the health of people, agriculture and environment, the Water 
Resource Management Agency shall draft and submit for approval to the National Water 
Council the relevant sublegal acts related to the designation of areas vulnerable to 
contamination from harmful substances or elements, such as different chemical substances 
and biocides                                                                                               


--- PAGE 25 ---

 
 
2. The minister responsible for environment, in cooperation with the minister responsible for 
agriculture and the minister responsible for economy shall issue regulations, which define the 
programmes, measures and other relevant obligations, to reduce and prevent the contamination of 
water from hazardous substances, as defined in paragraph (1) of this Article, and from what is caused 
or derived by other agricultural, industrial and human activities.                                                                                         
 
Article 59                                                                                               
Areas of imminent protection                                                                                     
 
1. Based on the evidence received from competent bodies, the water resources management 
 
authorities shall define and designate protected zones and areas at any time when surface 
water and groundwater are seriously affected both in quantity and quality, and when there is an 
outbreak risk of communicable diseases.                                                                                               
2. The regime of these zones or areas and their boundaries shall be set out and modified 
according to specific circumstances, which shall be specified by a sub-legal act.                                                                  
 
Article 60                                                                                               
Special conservation areas                                                                                       
 
1. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the Minister responsible 
for protected environmental areas, shall designate basins, sub-basins, streams and rivers as "special 
conservation areas".                                                                                                
2. 
The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the minister responsible for protected 
environmental areas, shall approve the special conservation areas as referred to in paragraph (1) of 
this Article. 
Article 61 
Coordination of territorial regulation and water resource plans 
 
Authorities drafting plans and studies on territorial regulation shall take into consideration 
water resources management plan. 
 
Article 62 
Land covered by water 
 
1. Swamps or areas covered by water pursuant to the definitions of this Law, including those 
developed artificially shall be defined as lands covered by water. The National Water Council shall 
determine their borders 
2. All activities carried out or affecting them shall be subject to authorisations, permits and 
concessions. 
                                                                                               
Article 63 
Hazardous Areas for Human Health 
 
The National Water Council in cooperation with the relevant health and environmental 
protection authorities shall determine the areas that are dangerous for human life, designated as 
harmful to public interest, and shall decide on draining the land under water. 
 
 
CHAPTER IX                                                                                             
PROTECTION OF BANKS                                                                                      
 
Article 64                                                                                               
Protection of banks 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 26 ---

Protection of banks shall be a public task carried out through construction, reconstruction and 
maintenance of dams, infrastructural coating works and other technical measures and works, including 
biological ones.                                                                                               
 
Article 65 
Temporary Protection                                                                                          
 
Local and foreign natural and legal persons upon receiving the approval from the water 
resources administration and management bodies can undertake temporary protection activities in 
cases of emergency.                                                                                                
 
Article 66 
Construction activities on banks                                                                                  
 
1. Bodies responsible for territorial planning in the local government units shall issue permits for the 
construction, reconstruction or demolition of riverbank protection facilities, walls, dams and other 
bankside works, only if they shall be equipped with a special authorisation from the water 
resources administration and management bodies.                                                                                               
 
2. The water resources administration and management bodies shall issue a special authorization for 
construction activities on the shores, only for public purposes. Activities for public purposes are 
determined on a case-by-case basis by water resources management bodies. 
 
Article 67 
Activities prohibited on banks and beaches 
 
1. The following shall be prohibited on banks, beaches and flood areas:                                                                 
a) change or displacement of natural or artificial plant layers;                                                                                   
b) extracting of solid materials, sand, gravel, pebbles or silt;                                                                                  
c) construction of parking lots for waters vessels and vehicles;                                                                                 
d) development of dry places for nets;                                                                                                
e) digging, drilling or rinsing;                                                                                               
f) disposal or storage of solid materials as a result of demolishing constructed facilities, 
digging and other waste-generating activities;                                                                                               
g)  discharge of untreated urban and industrial wastewater.                                                                                    
 
2. With the aim of securing and maintaining the banks, the water resources administration 
and management bodies in cooperation with the bodies responsible for territorial planning and 
regulation, shall be entitled to restrict or prohibit use of the beach, sea bottom, dunes, slopes and any 
other area designated for the protection and maintenance of the bank.                                                                                
 
CHAPTER X 
WATER NEGATIVE EFFECTS                                                                                   
 
Article 68                                                                                               
Floods                                                                                               
 
1. The water resources management and administration bodies shall take all necessary 
measures within the areas affected by floods to ensure people’s lives, animals and properties. In cases 
of extended floods, in collaboration with the responsible civil emergencies bodies, they shall order 
emergency works, asking from water users for all necessary equipment and materials to meet this 
goal.    
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 27 ---

2. Water resource management and administration bodies, in cooperation with local 
government structures and bodies, shall be responsible for preventing, coping with and rehabilitating 
the situation.                                                                                                
3. Every natural or legal person, holder of a permit, authorization, and concession shall be 
obliged to cooperate by providing any assistance and information to the responsible authorities 
defined in this article for eliminating the consequences of floods and other harmful water effects. 
4. Water users shall carry out maximum discharges in accordance with the conditions and 
criteria set out in the basin management plans, and in other bylaws. 
5. Discharges forced by maximum flows are an exception to point 4 of this article. 
6. Conditions and criteria for maximum discharges shall be approved by Decision of the 
Council of Ministers.                                                                                               
Article 69 
Flooded lands 
1. Lands, which might be flooded because of overflowing lakes, ponds, reservoirs, rivers, 
streams and other flows shall keep their previous legal status.                                                                                             
2. In special cases when human life, livestock or private and public property are at risk, the 
National Water Council, upon considering the opinion of local governmental structures and bodies 
and structures responsible for civil emergency, shall impose restrictions on the use of flooded areas or 
other areas under the harmful effects of water.                                                                                               
3. Storage of materials and substances that can be dissolved in water and the construction of 
new facilities in flood-threatened areas shall be prohibited.                                                                                               
 
Article 70 
Flood risk management plan                                                                                     
 
1. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the ministry responsible 
for civil emergencies, shall draft bylaws on flood risk management plans and rules, in conformity with 
the applicable civil emergency legislation and the National Civil Emergency Plan. 
2. The Water Resources Management Agency in cooperation with the river basin 
management offices shall draft for its river basin districts a flood risk management plan, which 
focuses on prevention, protection, preparedness, including flood forecasting and early flood warning 
systems, which it delivers for coordination to structures responsible for civil emergencies 
3. 
The flood risk management plan shall be drafted by taking into account the relevant 
characteristics of the river basins. Flood management plans shall also include the promotion of 
sustainable land use practices, improvement of water holding capacities and flood control of certain 
areas in the event of flooding.                                                                                               
4. 
The flood risk management plan shall be an integral part of the river basin 
management plan.                                                                                               
5.         The Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister responsible for civil 
emergencies, after prior approval by the National Water Council, shall approve the sub-legal act for 
plans and rules on flood risk management drafted by the Water Resources Management Agency. 
CHAPTER XI 
 
WATER FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES  
 
Article 71 
Construction 


--- PAGE 28 ---

1. The construction of facilities and structures for use of water resources and the prevention 
of harmful actions of water, done for public services, shall be subject to authorizations, permits or 
concessions, according to the legislation in force.                                                                                               
2. The legal person responsible for construction, within 30 days from the completion of the 
facility or structure, must inform the water resources administration or management bodies, which 
have allowed the activity, to perform the final inspection on this water facility or structure. 
 
Article 72                                                                                               
Competences of Water Resources Management and Administration Bodies 
 
1. Water resources administration bodies, in collaboration with the inspectorate responsible 
for the environment and local government bodies, shall have the right to supervise and mandate 
physical or legal entities or persons to install equipment that control and measure the quantity of water 
used on private land, as well as the servitudes needed to access such installations for preparatory and 
construction work.  
2. Water resources administration bodies, in collaboration with the inspectorate responsible 
for the environment, shall have the right to control the operation and maintenance of water 
structures/facilities within the terms set out in the permit; in addition, they shall impose sanctions and 
mandate the installation of drinking water transportation pipelines or sewerage pipelines.  
3. Water resources administration bodies, in collaboration with the inspectorate responsible 
for the environment, shall perform periodical controls on water structures and facilities. Thus, their 
authorised individuals shall have the right to inspect structures and facilities and shall request 
information and documentation related to them.                                                                                               
 
CHAPTER XII                                                                                             
DISCHARGES AND SEWERAGE 
 
Article 73                                                                                               
Liquid Discharges                                                                                              
 
1. To discharge on water, on the ground and underground it is necessary to have a permit or 
authorization, issued by the management and administration water resources bodies, in conformity 
with the applicable law.                                                                                               
1/1. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the ministry responsible for 
the environment and the ministry responsible for water supply and sewerage, shall draft liquid 
discharge norms and general and specific requirements for different types of activities which result 
in the release of liquid discharges on the environment.                                                                                                
 
2. The Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister responsible for the environment 
and the Minister responsible for water supply and sewerage, shall approve the norms of liquid 
discharges and the general and specific requirements for different types of activities, which result in 
the release of liquid discharges in the environment.                                                                                               
                                                                                               
Article 74 
Wastewater sewerage system                                                                                     
 
1. Wastewater sewerages are necessary to be installed and used for all activities that generate 
wastewater, in pursuance with the legislation governing water supply and sewerage services, and with 
the bylaws applicable to this field.                                                                                               
2. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the ministry responsible 
for the environment and the ministry responsible for water supply and sewerage, shall draft the 
environmental criteria for the construction and operation of sewerage systems. 
3. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Minister responsible for the 
environment and the Minister responsible for water supply and sewerage, shall approve the 
environmental criteria for the construction and operation of sewerage systems. 
4. The wastewater system shall be planned in such a way as to quickly dispose and discharge 
sewage water, produced in public or private buildings, on certain places, away from human 
settlements.                                                                                               


--- PAGE 29 ---

5. The construction of the sewerage system should be made in such a way as to avoid spills, 
which could end up and pollute surface water, groundwater, as well as coastal waters. 
6. Certain entities may assume the responsibility of collecting, transporting, treating and 
discharging sewage at designated sites.                                                                                               
 
Article 75 
Individual and collective sewerage canals 
 
1. When several individuals use a common sewerage system, the entity responsible for the 
collective sewerage system shall be responsible to the water resources management bodies. 
2. In case of an individual sewerage system, the individual discharging entity, domestic or 
non-domestic, shall be responsible to the water resources management bodies. 
 
Article 76 
Wastewater treatment facilities 
 
The Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister responsible for the environment and 
the Minister responsible for water supply and sewerage, shall approve regulations and normative acts 
for the design, construction and use of wastewater treatment plants.                                                                                   
 
 
CHAPTER XIII                                                                                               
PERMITS, AUTHORISATIONS FOR WASTEWATER DISCHARGE 
 
 
Article 77 
Common provisions for permits and authorizations 
 
1. Applications for permits and authorisations of discharge shall contain in details the criteria 
that should be met by the discharger, as set out in the sublegal acts in force. They should contain a 
description of the treatment plant, monitoring equipment and procedures to ensure its appropriate 
operation, as well as the definition regarding the chemical composition and bacteriological 
concentration of the discharge.                                                                                               
2. The characteristics of discharge permits and authorizations shall be the same as those for 
water use. In any case, they contain the conditions related to treatment and monitoring plants, and the 
standards of treated water will be decided based on them.                                                                                               
3. Permits and authorizations for activities that may cause discharges to be accumulated or 
infiltrated with time in surface water, natural or artificial beds, water bearing strata or groundwater, 
will be granted only after a complex study done within one year from the date of application for a 
discharge permit. Licensed or accredited institutions shall conduct the study in compliance to the 
legislation in force.                                                                                                
4. Reuse of wastewater shall be subject to administrative permits. If an entity different from 
the first shall reuse the water, then both entities shall be equipped with separate permits. The National 
Water Council shall define the rules of wastewater direct reuse based on treatment and quality 
processes and on the purpose of use of treated waters.                                                                                               
 
Article 78 
Administrative permits                                                                                          
 
The permit, authorisation for discharges by associations or industries that might or shall 
perform wastewater discharge, shall be issued in compliance with respective bylaws, provided that the 
permit, authorisation for water use, has already been obtained.                                                                                           
 
Article 79 
Refusing to grant permits and authorisations 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 30 ---

Water administration bodies shall have the right to refuse granting permits and authorisations 
for industrial activities or processes, when their discharges, even if already treated, pose a serious risk 
for the pollution of water resources, ecological system and environment. 
 
Article 80 
Changing the Permit                                                                                            
 
1. When it is under its authority, the river basin council shall be entitled to decide about the 
temporary, permanent or changing of the permit and authorisation, if the circumstances, on the basis 
of which the permit had been granted, shall change, or new conditions shall arise, which, if they had 
existed at the time when the permit was issued, the permit would have been denied or issued with 
other terms and conditions.                                                                                               
2. In cases when the National Water Council shall have the authority to temporarily or 
permanently suspend or change the permit and authorisation, the River Basin Council shall make its 
relevant proposals by a formal decision, which is then sent to the Water Resource Management 
Agency to be examined by the National Water Council.                                                                                               
 
Article 81 
Interrupting Wastewater Discharge Activities 
 
Water administration bodies shall have the right to order the immediate interruption of all 
activities or some of their components, in relation to wastewater discharge, which might cause 
unauthorised discharges affecting public interest.                                                                                                
 
Article 82 
Payments for administrative costs                                                                                 
 
Authorised activities for discharges shall be subject to administrative payments in accordance 
with the criteria and fees defined by the Council of Ministers.                                                                                               
 
CHAPTER XIV                                                                                               
 
SERVITUDES                                                                                             
 
Article 83 
Servitudes 
 
Landowners shall refer to the definitions set out in the provisions of the Civil Code, with 
regard to issues servitude that are related to water flow and provision. 
 
Article 84 
Activities at / alongside the banks                                                                          
Near coastal activities shall be defined in the studies and research for regulatory 
territorial planning. These documents shall be approved in advance by the National Water 
Council. 
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 31 ---

CHAPTER XV 
MONITORING 
 
Article 85 
Monitoring the status of inland marine waters, surface water, groundwater and protected 
areas 
 
1. The River Basin Council shall carry out the water status monitoring program, in order to 
establish a coherent and understandable water status review in each basin. 
2. For surface water, such programs shall cover:  
a) The ecological, chemical and microbiological status, the ecological potential and 
biodiversity                                                                                               
b) the volume and level or degree of flow required to achieve the relevant ecological and 
chemical status, ecological potential;                                                                                               
3. Repealed.                                                                                               
4. Depending on the case, the specifications stipulated in the legislation on protected areas 
supplement the programs mentioned in points 1, 2 and 3 of this article. 
5. The groundwater program covers and addresses chemical and quantitative status 
monitoring.                                                                                               
6. These programs should come to life not later than six years from the approval of this law. 
 6/1. The Water Resources Management Agency, in cooperation with the ministry 
responsible for the environment, shall draft the requirements for monitoring programs. 
7. The Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister responsible for the environment, 
shall approve the requests for monitoring programs, in conformity with this article. 
 
Article 86 
Data monitoring and management 
 
1. The Council of Ministers, upon the proposal of the Minister responsible for the 
environment, shall approve the regulation for drafting the systematic monitoring program of the 
conditions of surface water, groundwater and protected areas. 
2. The regulation shall set out the parameters to be monitored, the necessary procedures and 
technical measures, including, but not limited to, the requirements for sampling and making analysis 
for each parameter, quality control, laboratory practices, recording and data management. 
3. The regulation shall set out the criteria for the publication of annual and perennial periodic 
bulletins, with public access, with the monitoring results of surface water, groundwater and protected 
areas.                                                                                               
 
Article 87 
Monitoring of water bodies designated for the production of drinking water 
 
The River Basin Administration Office is the institution responsible for monitoring surface and 
groundwater bodies, designated for the production of drinking water. 
 
KREU XVI 
NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES CADASTRE AND THE NATIONAL REGISTER 
OF PERMITS, AUTHORIZATIONS AND CONCESSIONS FOR USE OF WATERS 
 
Article 88                                                                                               
National Water Resources Cadastre 
 
1. The Water Resource Management Agency shall be the responsible institution for 
establishing, managing and updating the National Water Resources Cadastre. 
2. The National Water Resources Cadaster shall contain information on: 
a) surface water classified according to their chemical and ecological status; 
b) protected areas;                                                                                               
c) heavily modified water bodies;                                                                                               
d) environmental permits for activities that result in wastewater discharged into bodies of water; 
e) areas susceptible to eutrophication and nitrate vulnerable zones; 
f) hygiene and sanitation protection areas;                                                                                               


--- PAGE 32 ---

g) areas of imminent protection;                                                                                               
h) areas of special protection;                                                                                               
i) healthcare risk areas;                                                                                               
j) bodies of water designated for drinking water production.                                                                                  
 
3. Upon the proposal of the Prime minister, the Council of Ministers shall adopt the 
requirements, conditions, procedures and necessary funds for establishing, maintaining, managing and 
updating the Water Resources National Cadastre.                                                                                               
4. All institutions, entities and other subjects, public or private, dealing with water resources 
management shall be obliged to assign a representative, who shall keep contact with the Water 
Resource Management Agency and shall send the data to the Water Resources National Cadastre, in 
accordance with the relevant forms and procedures set out by decision of the Council of Ministers. 
5. The National Water Resources Cadastre and its data shall be stored, maintained, managed 
and updated through an electronic system and archive.                                                                                               
 
Article 89 
Functions of the National Water Resources Cadastre  
 
1. Information in the National Water Resources Cadastre shall be organized according to 
water resources integrated electronic data, independently and in relation to each other. Responsible 
bodies for water resources management shall set up, maintain and manage respectively the database. 
2. The National Water Resources Cadastre and its data shall be published in the official 
website of the Water Resource Management Agency.                                                                                               
3. The data of the National Water Resources Cadastre shall be used by other public, national 
or local institutions and authorities in compliance with this law and other legal and sublegal acts. 
4. Any institution shall enter their data in the National Water Resources Cadastre and shall 
publish them in their electronic website.                                                                                               
 
Article 90 
National Register of Authorizations, Permits                                                                        
and Concessions for Use of Water                                                                                 
 
1. The River Basin Administration Office shall hold the register in which records are made of 
all licences, authorisations, permits and concessions granted in compliance to this law and the 
sublegal acts in its pursuance.                                                                                               
2. The Water Resource Management Agency shall establish, maintain, manage and update 
the National Register for all permits, authorisations and concessions granted by the water resources 
management and administration bodies.                                                                                               
3. Any register shall contain the following:                                                                                               
a) data on all applications, authorisations, permits and new concessions required in 
compliance with this law, or data on changing, renewing or waiving the existing ones; 
b) procedures for the application of these authorisations, permits and concessions. 
 
4. 
The River Basin Administration Offices shall provide the Water Resources 
Management Agency with the data available in their registers in conformity to the provisions of 
this law.                                                                                               
 
 
CHAPTER XVII 
 
PUBLIC INFORMATION AND CONSULTATION 


--- PAGE 33 ---

Article 91 
The right to receive and use information on water resources 
1. Every natural and legal person has the right to be provided with available information on 
water resources.                                                                                               
2. The public shall be provided with information on basic documents and data used for 
drafting basin management plans, and with the opportunity to participate in the consultation and 
feedback processes on river basin management plans.                                                                                               
CHAPTER XVIII                                                                                           
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS                                                                                        
Article 92                                                                                               
Fees for Use of Waters                                                                                          
1. The Council of Ministers shall adopt the fees for water use by taking into consideration the 
following factors:                                                                                               
a) type of water required for use;                                                                                               
b) purpose of water use;                                                                                               
c) season when water is used;                                                                                               
d) quantity of water to be used;                                                                                               
e) line items for the costs of designing, construction, use, maintenance and amortisation of 
water structures/facilities and foreseen revenues for the water user generated by use of this water 
structure/facility.                                                                                                
f) suitability of plants for treatment and disposal of water after its use, in the sense of 
considering its effect on human health, water and environment quality.                                                                              
2. The fees for use of transboundary waters shall be defined by a decision of the Council of 
Ministers                                                                                               
3. The fire fighting forces, be they public or private entities, shall be exempted from the water 
fees, if water is used in cases of fire suppression. 
 
Article 93 
Administrative Costs 
 
1. Anyone requesting to perform activities related to water use or discharge, for the 
construction of water structures and facilities in accordance with this Law, shall be obliged to pay for 
administrative costs.                                                                                               
2. 
Upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, the Council of Ministers shall adopt the fees for 
administrative costs.                                                                                               
Article 94 
Collection of fees and payments for administrative costs 
 
1. The water resources management bodies shall collect the fees for water use and the 
payments for administrative costs.                                                                                               
2. Revenues generated through administrative costs, fines and water use fees shall be 
transferred to the State Budget.                                                                                                
 
Article 95 
The bodies responsible for implementation of the Law 
 
1. Water resources administration bodies, local government units, structures of the ministry 
responsible for healthcare, agriculture, civil emergency structures and bodies, territorial regulation and 
planning shall be responsible for taking measures and implementing the provisions of this Law under 
the overall management of the AMBU                                                                                               
2. Inspectorates responsible for the environment, healthcare and agriculture shall be in charge 
for the implementation of the provisions of this Law, under the overall management of the AMBU (as 
part of the integrated water resource management cycle).                                                                                               
3. The inspectorate responsible for environmental protection and regional environmental 
agencies shall be in charge for the implementation of the provisions of this Law, in compliance with 
the provisions of the law on environmental protection.                                                                                               


--- PAGE 34 ---

4. Users involved in the area of water management, on whom this law applies, shall provide 
necessary assistance to inspectors responsible for environment, so that they can perform inspections 
on a given activity such as taking, analysing and collecting all necessary information, carrying out 
their tasks related to this Law, in conformity with the requirements of law on environmental 
protection.                                                                                               
5. The inspection to verify that legal requirements are observed shall be carried out pursuant 
to this law, law on environmental protection and law on inspection in the Republic of Albania, under 
the overall management of the AMBU (as part of the integrated water resource management cycle). 
 
 
CHAPTER XIX 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENCES 
 
Article 96                                                                                               
Inspection and identification of administrative offences 
1. National inspectorates responsible for territorial, environmental and water control shall 
exercise control to verify that legal requirements are met in accordance with this law, the law on 
inspection and legal and sub legal acts for their operation, under the overall management of the 
AMBU (as part of the integrated water resource management cycle) 
2. When identifying a violation of the provisions of this law, the responsible inspectorate 
shall impose a fine as a main punishment, as well as additional penalties, including the obligation to 
reverse the consequences on water sources or the obligation to compensate for the relevant damage.  
3. The Council of Ministers shall adopt the procedure for damage assessment and reversing 
the consequences on water resources.                                                                                               
Article 97 
Administrative Sanctions 
Violations of the provisions of this law, if they are not a criminal offence, shall be 
administrative contraventions and shall be punished as follows: 
1. Discharge on the environment of industrial used waters, contrary to the provision of point 
7 of article 30 of this law, is an administrative contravention and shall be punished by a fine from 1 
000 000 lek to 5 000 000 lek.                                                                                               
2. Actions that are in contradiction to article 39 of this law, regarding the amount of the 
minimum ecological flow for each natural water body, are administrative contraventions and shall be 
punished by punished by a fine from 1 000 000 lek to 2 000 000 lek. 
3. Actions in contradiction to letters "a", "b", "c", "d", "e", “f” "h" and "" of paragraph 1 of 
Article 41 of this law, are administrative offenses. When for a certain activity the law foresees 
issuance of a permit by the River Basin Council, the administrative violation shall be punished by a 
fine from 500 000 lek to 1 000 000 Lek. When the law foresees issuance of a permit by the National 
Water Council, an administrative offense shall be fined from 1 000 000 lek to 2 000 000 lek. 
             3/1 Actions in contradiction to letters "a", "b" and "c" of paragraph 2 of article 42 of this law 
are administrative contraventions and shall be punished by a fine from 1 000 000 lek to 2 000 000 lek. 
4. Failure to obtain an authorisation from the water administration and management bodies 
for activities set out in letters “a”, “b” and “c” of paragraph 1, Article 44 of this Law, shall be 
considered an administrative contravention and shall be punished by a fine from 1 000 000 Lek to 500 
000 Lek.                                                                                               
5. Extraction of solid materials such as sand and gravel, which are extracted from the beds of 
rivers, streams and lakes, with or without water, in contradiction to Article 48 of this Law, shall be 
considered an administrative violation and shall be punished with a fine from 1 000 000 Lek to 2 000 
000 Lek.  
                                                                                              


--- PAGE 35 ---

6. Drilling and interventions in the area with curative, thermal, thermal-mineral and 
geothermal natural water resources, as well as pumping directly form sources of curative, thermal, 
thermal-mineral and geothermal waters, in contradiction to letters “g” and “h” of paragraph 1, Article 
48 of this Law, shall be considered an administrative contravention and shall be punished by a fine 
from 500 000 Lek to 1 000 000 Lek.                                                                                               
7. Use of curative, mineral, thermal/mineral and geothermal natural water resources without 
the permission of water resources management bodies, and change of the intended use of these 
resources in contradiction to paragraph 2 of Article 58 of this Law, shall be administrative 
contraventions and shall be punished by a fine from 500 000 Lek to 1 000 000 Lek 
8. Commercial activity by professional well drillers without a licence form the QKB, in 
contradiction to paragraph 1 of Article 56 of this Law, shall be an administrative contravention and 
shall be punished by a fine from 100 000 Lek to 500 000 Lek.  
9. In the case professional drillers fail to submit on time the drilling report to the water 
resources administration bodies, after drilling is completed, as set out in paragraph 3 of Article 56 of 
this Law, shall be an administrative contravention and shall be punished by a fine from 100 000 Lek 
to 300 000 Lek.                                                                                               
10. 
Drilling activities for water extraction by natural, legal entities or unlicensed 
individuals conducting drilling operations without obtaining beforehand a drilling permit from water 
resources management bodies, as set out in paragraph 6 of Article 56 of this Law, shall be 
administrative contraventions and shall be punished by a fine from 300 000 Lek to 500 000 Lek. 
11. Activities carried out without relevant permits or authorizations in the areas of hygienic-
sanitary protection, set out in letters "a", "b" and "c" of point 3 of article 57 of this law, are considered 
administrative contraventions and shall be punishable by a fine from 500 000 lekë to 1 000 000 lekë. 
12. Activities conducted in contradiction to Articles 67, 69, point 3 and 84 of this law, with 
regard to actions for the protection of banks, activities performed on banks without relevant permits, 
activities prohibited on banks and beaches, storing of materials and substances and the construction of 
new facilities in the areas vulnerable to flooding, and the construction of water facilities and structures 
without the relevant permits, shall be administrative contraventions and shall be punished by a fine 
from 1 000 000 Lek to 2 000 000 Lek.                                                                                               
13. Actions performed in contradiction to point 4 of article 68 of this law, regarding 
maximum discharges by water users, which are not done in accordance to the conditions and criteria 
set out in the basin management plans and other bylaws, shall be administrative contraventions and 
shall be fined from 1 000 000 ALL to 2 000 000 ALL                                                                                               
14. Actions performed in contradiction to point 1 of article 71 of this law, related to the 
construction of structures and facilities for the use of water resources, without a relevant permit or 
authorization, shall be administrative contraventions and shall be punished by a fine from 500 000 
ALL to 1 000 000 ALL                                                                                               
15. Failure to inform the water resources administration or management bodies on the 
completion of a facility or structure within the legal deadline, as referred in paragraph 2, Article 71 of 
this Law, shall be an administrative contravention and shall be punished by a fine from 100 000 Lek 
to 300 000 Lek                                                                                               
16. Discharges on water, land, underground or in pits, without the approval issued by the 
water resource management body, stipulated in point 1 of article 73 of this law, shall be administrative 
contraventions and shall be punished by a fine of 500,000 to 1,000,000. ALL  
17. In addition to fines, depending on the level of pollution or damage, decisions might be 
taken which might result in the partial or total suspension of the activity, the obligation to reverse the 
negative consequences on water resources by restoring previous conditions or the obligation to 
compensate for relevant damages in case rehabilitation shall be carried out by management bodies of 
water resources, or the appropriation of tools and equipment which become then property of state 
reserves.                                                                                                
18. The Council of Ministers shall adopt the procedure for regulating the consequences on 
water resources and the way damage shall be compensated.                                                                                                
 
Article 98                                                                                               
Classification of administrative measures 


--- PAGE 36 ---

Fines, suspension of activity up to 10 days, suspension of activity for two months, or repeal of 
permit as provided for by this Law, shall be the main punishments, whereas other measures such as 
the appropriation of tools, equipment and solid materials shall be complementary punishments. 
 
Article 99                                                                                               
Appeal                                                                                               
 
1. The decision of water resources management and administration bodies can be appealed at 
the competent court within the deadlines set by the legislation from the date of the notification of the 
decision. 
2. The decision of national inspectors responsible for territorial, environmental and water 
control may be appealed or specifically appealed in accordance with the legislation in force. 
 
Article 100                                                                                               
Enforcement and administrative violations 
 
The enforcement of administrative measures in application of this law shall comply with the 
Law on administrative offences.                                                                                                
 
CHAPTER XX 
TRANZITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS 
 
Article 101 
Proposal and adoption of sublegal acts  
1. The Council of Ministers shall approve of the sublegal acts in pursuance of articles 8; 11, 
point 2; 16, point  6; 17, point 2; 22, point 2; 25, point 3; 26, point 3; 29; 31, point 1/1; 34, point 3; 36, 
point 2; 41, point 3; 42, point 5; 44, point 2; 48, point 3; 50, point 1 and 6; 53, point 3; 57, point 2; 59, 
point 2; 60, point 2; 68, point 6; 70, point 5; 73, point 2; 74, point 2; 76; 78; 82; 85, point 7; 86, point 1; 88, 
point 3; 92, point  1 and 2; 93, point 2; and 96, point 3, of this law, within six months from the day of becoming 
effective.                                                                                               
 
2. The National Water Council shall approve the acts in pursuance of articles 9, point 3, letter 
“d”; 26, point 4; 27, points 1 and 2; 28, point 4; 35, point 1; 37, point 3; 44, point 1; 46; 58, point 1; 62, 
point 1; 63; 69, point 2; and 77, point 4, within six months from the day of becoming effective. 
 
3. The Minister responsible for environment, in cooperation with the Minister responsible for 
agriculture, the Minister in charge of economy and the minister responsible for health, shall issue 
regulations for the implementation of point 2 of Article 35 of this law. 
4. The Minister responsible for environment, in cooperation with the Minister responsible for 
agriculture, the Minister in charge of economy and the minister responsible for health, shall issue 
regulations for the implementation of point 2 of Article 58 of this law.                                                                        
 
Article 102                                                                                               
 
When a permit or authorization issued before the entry into force of this law is contrary to the 
provisions of this law, the former shall be revoked, but without depriving the holder of the right to 
continue the activity to the end of the term and, upon its expiration, to apply for a new permit or 
authorization.                                                                                               
 
Article 103 
Repeals 
 
With the entry into force of this law, law no. 8093, dated 21.3.1996 "On water reserves", as 
amended, as well as any other provision that is inconsistent with the provisions of this law shall be 
repealed. 
 
Article 104 


--- PAGE 37 ---

Entry into force 
 
This law shall enter into force 1 year following its publication in the Official Gazette. 
Approved on 15.11.2012                                                                                               
 
Approved by decree no. 7845, dated 03.12.2012 of the President of the Republic of Albania, Bujar 
Nishani 
 
 
TRANZITIONAL AND 
FINAL PROVISIONS 
Article 66 
1. Natural and legal entities using groundwater without being provided with a permit or 
authorization, according to the provisions of law no. 111/2012 "On integrated management 
of water resources", shall be obliged to declare their activity at the river basin administration 
office, within 12 months from the date of entry into force of this law. 
2. Entities that self-declare their activity within the deadline defined in point 1 of this 
article shall not be punished for the administrative offense committed.  
3. The Council of Ministers shall specify the procedure to be followed and 
documentation that self-declaring entities should fulfill within six months from entering into 
force of this law.                                                                                                
4. 
The functions currently held the relevant structures of the ministry responsible for 
integrated management of water resources will continue to be performed by this same 
institution, until when the relevant budget of 2018 is transferred to the Water Resources 
Management Agency.                                                                                                
