NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
Law No. 6/02
of June 21

Whereas water is one of the most important natural resources necessary for life, for economic and social development, and for environmental balance;

Considering that the need for economic and social development imposes the use of adequate water management, which requires the establishment of precise rules for its use and utilization;

Bearing in mind the integrated management, the development of water resources, and, simultaneously, their protection and conservation;

Taking into account that the current legislation for water resources is no longer consistent with the current legal, economic, and social framework, nor with the new technical-scientific demands in this domain;

There being a need to update the legislation on waters and to create a legal and institutional framework, whose general law establishes the fundamental principles that shall guide the conduct of all stakeholders in the management and use of water;

In these terms, under the provision of paragraph b) of article 88 of the Constitutional Law, the National Assembly approves the following:

WATER LAW
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 1
(Objective)

This law defines the general principles of the legal regime inherent to the use of water resources.

ARTICLE 2
(Subject Matter)

This law applies to inland waters, whether surface or subterranean, constituting part of the national hydrological cycle.

ARTICLE 3
(Scope)

This law, in relation to inland waters, establishes:
a) the public water domain, the general policy for its management and development, as well as the competencies attributed to the State institutions related thereto;
b) the legal regime for the activities of inventorying, development, control, inspection, protection, and conservation of water resources;
c) the rights and duties of all stakeholders in the management and use of water.

ARTICLE 4
(Definitions)

For the purposes of interpreting this law, the meanings of the terms used are contained in the annex which is an integral part of this law.

ARTICLE 5
(Ownership of Waters)

Waters, the subject of this law, as a natural resource, are the property of the State, constituting part of the public water domain.

The State's right relative to waters, as a natural resource, is inalienable and imprescriptible.

The right to use the public water domain is granted in a manner that guarantees its preservation and management for the benefit of the public interest.

ARTICLE 6
(Definition of Banks)

It is incumbent upon the supervisory body, in coordination with the competent State bodies, to:
a) define the legal bank line of the deposits and watercourses of the Country;
b) create mechanisms for their registration in the Water Cadastre;
c) adopt the necessary measures for the protection of the beds and bank lines.

It is also incumbent upon the supervisory body, without prejudice to the provisions of the laws on land, environment, and other applicable legislation, to ensure the preservation, conservation, and defense of the partial protection areas defined in the previous number.

Land parcels of a property that, due to flooding, become separated from it, always belong to their owner and not to the bed of the watercourse.

The use and exploitation of the beds are subject to the regimes of license or concession, under the terms of this law and its regulations.

ARTICLE 7
(Ownership of Floodable Zones)

The lands covered by floodable zones maintain the legal qualification and ownership they had.

To ensure the safety of persons and property, they may, however, be declared partial protection zones or be subject to other restrictions, in accordance with this law, its regulations, and other applicable legislation.

ARTICLE 8
(Spills and Drainage of Waters)

On a property, spills that flow to it naturally from neighboring properties may be used, without the need for a title of use and without prejudice to the rights of the owners of the properties in question; such spills are subject to the specific regime defined in regulation.

The spills produced are subject to the contingencies of the source flow, the distribution or use made of the waters on the property of origin, and the observance of the defined pollution limits and environmental protection standards, for which reason they cannot be considered obligatory or permanent.

The beneficiaries of a given drainage system are obliged to preserve and maintain the canals and works that constitute it.

In a drainage system, works that alter the natural level of the waters and the phreatic level, which are likely to cause prejudice to third parties, may not be constructed, unless the owner of the work bears the costs of mitigation or overcoming the damages caused.

If excessive soil moisture is due to the existence of drainage works, those affected have the right to request their modification, provided that such alterations do not constitute prejudice to the owner of the work and to third parties.

CHAPTER II
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF WATER MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE 9
(Principles of Water Management)

Water management shall obey the following principles:
a) of the right of the citizen and collective entities to water;
b) of the unity of the hydrological cycle, which presupposes the institution of a single legal regime for its management;
c) of the unity and coherence of the management of the Country's river basins as physical-territorial units for the planning and management of water resources;
d) of the integrated management of water resources;
e) of institutional coordination and community participation;
f) of the compatibility of the water management policy with the land use planning policy and environmental policy;
g) of water as a social, renewable, limited, and economically valuable good;
h) of the promotion of adequate forms of participation of the public and private sectors in the management and development of water resources;
i) of the complementarity of water supply with residual liquid sanitation;
j) of the relationship between pollution and social and financial responsibility for the reparation of environmental damages.

The observance of these principles is guaranteed by the action of the State and by all stakeholders in the management and use of water, under the terms of this law and its regulations.

ARTICLE 10
(Objectives of Water Management Policies)

The national policy on water resources management aims at equality of treatment and opportunity for the stakeholders in the process of water use, the preservation of well-being and the environment, the promotion of the practice of efficient water use, as well as the incentive to private initiative relative to the rational use of available water resources.

It is incumbent upon the State to implement, throughout the national territory and respecting the Principles of Water Management, management policies oriented towards the realization of the following objectives:
a) to guarantee citizens and collective entities access to and use of water;
b) to ensure the permanent balance between available water resources and demand;
c) to guarantee the use of available waters for all purposes, through their rational and planned utilization, with a view to the sustained development of the national economy;
d) to supply populations continuously and sufficiently with potable water, for the satisfaction of their domestic and hygiene needs;
e) to promote, frame, and regulate the use of water for agricultural, livestock, industrial, and hydro-electric purposes;
f) to promote research actions and the efficient use of existing water resources;
g) to guarantee the adequate sanitation of wastewaters and regulate the discharge of effluents;
h) to safeguard navigation and transport, the development of fishing, sports practice, and recreation in water bodies.

The objectives provided for in the preceding numbers are promoted by the supervisory body and other competent entities.

ARTICLE 11
(General Inventory and Water Balance)

It is incumbent upon the supervisory body to carry out the general inventory of water resources in their aspects of quantity and quality and their respective periodic updating, in order to support integrated planning and management.

The water balance establishes the equilibrium between surface and subterranean water resources, currently available and potential, and their present and future demand.

The norms and techniques for carrying out the inventories and balance of water resources are contained in a specific regulation.

ARTICLE 12
(Registries)

For the purposes of applying this law, its regulations, and other legislation referring to registries, waters are considered immovable property.

The registration of common uses, traditionally recognized, is carried out by the institution entrusted with the management of water resources of the respective river basin.

The concessions and licenses for water use, their characteristics and subsequent modifications, as well as the authorizations for the discharge of effluents are subject to mandatory registration.

It is incumbent upon the beneficiary of the concession or license to request the registration, under the terms of the previous number, within a period of three months from the date of the granting of the right of use.

The right to use waters or its mortgage only produce effects in relation to third parties after registration in the Land Registry Office.

The facts contained in the registry are subject to regulation by the Government.

ARTICLE 13
(Mortgage)

The right to use water, when duly registered, may be the subject of a separate mortgage, independently of the immovable property to which the holder has destined it.

Rights not subject to registration may only be mortgaged jointly with the referred immovable property.

In both cases referred to in the preceding numbers, the registration of the public deed of the mortgage in the competent land registry office is mandatory.

ARTICLE 14
(Institutional Management Unit)

The main unit on which the management of water resources is based is the river basin.

The institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin has its competencies established in a Government regulation.

ARTICLE 15
(Planning of Water Resources)

The General Plans for the Development and Utilization of Water Resources of the Basins are prepared with the participation of the communities, obeying the principle of multiple uses, namely the interaction of different purposes, their economic and social impact, their priorities, and the influence that the uses have on the upstream-downstream interaction.

The National Plan for Water Resources aims at the integrated management of water resources on a national scale and is prepared in accordance with national interests, eventual inter-basin transfers of flow, and with the contribution of the General Plans for the Development and Utilization of Each Basin.

The General Plan for the Development and Utilization of Water Resources of Each Basin has as its final objective the optimization of the use of water resources in time and in the territorial space of the respective basin, viewed as a unitary whole.

The National Plan for Water Resources and the General Plans for the Development and Utilization of Water Resources of the Basins are approved by the Government.

ARTICLE 16
(Institutional Consultation)

The General Plan for Water Resources Management and, in a general way, the Water Management Policy and the aspects arising therefrom are, mandatorily, the subject of consultation with the institutions interested in water management and the different types of users.

The General Plans for the Development and Utilization of Water Resources of Each Basin and, in a general way, the management of waters in the respective geographical area are, mandatorily, the subject of consultation with local authorities, communities, and users.

It is incumbent upon the Government to establish the methodology, periodicity, and organization of the consultations at the different levels.

ARTICLE 17
(User Associations)

Users of water resources may, under the terms of the applicable legislation, voluntarily form associations.

It is incumbent upon the State to promote the participation of user associations in matters relating to the rational use of water resources.

ARTICLE 18
(National Water Resources Fund)

The National Water Resources Fund (FNRH) is created as a complementary financial source for the promotion of the development of water resources, the environmental protection associated with it, sanitation, and related actions.

Its establishment and management are subject to regulation by the Government.

ARTICLE 19
(International Cooperation)

Angola's international relations aim at the following objectives:
a) adoption of coordinated management measures for the watercourses of the same river basin, taking into account the interests of all the States of the basin;
b) fair and reasonable sharing of waters of common interest or their joint use, in accordance with the interests and obligations assumed by the Republic of Angola;
c) control of water quality and soil erosion;

It is incumbent upon the supervisory body to promote the necessary actions of international cooperation, with a view to guaranteeing the adequate management of international river basins and safeguarding national interests.

ARTICLE 20
(Inter-sectoral Coordination)

In the implementation of the general guidelines of the water management policy, the supervisory body promotes articulation with the institutions interested in water management.

CHAPTER III
GENERAL USE OF WATER

ARTICLE 21
(Realization of the Right of Access to Water)

The right of access to water is realized through common and private uses.

ARTICLE 22
(Realization of the Right of Access to Water)

Waters, as to their use, are classified as waters of common use and waters of private use, with common use being that which results from the law and is carried out under natural conditions, without contractual or administrative formalities, and private use being that which requires a license or concession, with the exception of the provision in article 26 of this law.

Common use has priority over private use.

ARTICLE 23
(Common Uses)

Common uses are those that aim to satisfy the domestic, personal, and family needs of the user, including the watering of livestock and the irrigation of subsistence crops, without strictly commercial purposes.

The common uses of waters are free of charge and free, and are carried out in accordance with the traditional regime of water use, without significantly altering their flow or quality.

Common uses are carried out without the need for licensing or concession, it being incumbent upon the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin and other competent entities to proceed with their recognition and promote their respective inventory.

It is forbidden, within the scope of common uses, to alter the banks or divert the water bodies from their beds.

It is incumbent upon the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin to define the quantitative limits and means used under the title of common use.

ARTICLE 24
(Private Uses)

Private uses are all other uses not provided for in article 23, and waters may only be used by means of a license or concession, with the exception of the provision in article 26, under the terms of this law and its regulations.

Any persons, whether individuals or collective, public or private, national or foreign, duly authorized, have access to private uses, under the terms of this law and other applicable legislation.

ARTICLE 25
(Conditions and Purposes Permitted in Private Use)

The waters of the public domain, by means of concession or license, may be used for the supply of potable water for human consumption, for irrigation and livestock, for energy production, for the treatment of ores, removal of gravel, treatment of vegetable fibers, as raw material for industry, and for any other purposes permitted by law.

The transfer of water from the public domain for the reproduction of fish species or other aquatic resources, and the industrial use of thermal and mineral-medicinal waters, as well as groundwater captured during mining operations, are subject to the general regime of licenses or concessions.

Navigation, transport, recreation, and sport in the water bodies of the public domain do not require a license or concession for the use of the water resource, with the authority granting the license for the activity being obliged to request an opinion from the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin.

The license or concession diploma for the use of the water resource shall state the location of the hydraulic works to be built, the volume of water granted, and the purposes and activity for which it is intended.

The title that confers the right to use water, regardless of the activity and purposes for which it is intended, is prior to the license or concession for the exercise of the productive activity.

When the industrial, mineral, agricultural, or other exploration is subject to the regime of concession or license, its duration, terms, and other requirements are subordinated to those of the license or concession for the use of the water resource.

The use of water for the supply of potable water for human consumption, for irrigation, livestock, and industrial purposes, is done in accordance with specific regulations approved by the Government.

ARTICLE 26
(Use Arising from the Right of Land Exploration)

The holders of the right to use and exploit the land, in order to satisfy their domestic needs and the normal and foreseeable needs of agriculture, may, without licensing and free of charge, under the terms of the regulation, use:
a) the waters of lakes, ponds, and swamps existing within their respective plot, except in cases where, due to their volume or importance, such use requires a license or concession;
b) the waters of springs, flowing freely, which do not cross the boundaries of the respective plot or do not flow into a current;
c) subterranean waters not included in protection zones, provided that they do not disturb their regime, nor deteriorate their quality;
d) rainwater.

The uses referred to in the previous number may not affect pre-existing common uses, when traditionally established, or the rights of third parties.

The users of plots that surround lakes, ponds, and swamps may use the waters under the conditions established in the previous numbers, unless their volume and importance require a license or concession in accordance with what is established in regulation.

The artificial accumulation of rainwater, beyond the limits defined in regulation, by the holders of the right to use and exploit the land, is conditioned to the regime of private use.

ARTICLE 27
(Duties of Holders of Marginal Plots)

The holders of the right to use and exploit plots bathed by continuous or discontinuous watercourses may not hinder, without prior authorization, the free course of the waters, it being their obligation to remove the obstacles that oppose it when they have originated in their plots, unless it is an alteration to the water regime resulting from natural phenomena.

The conservation of the free course of the waters includes, namely:
a) not changing the course of the water without prior authorization and, once this is obtained, ensuring that the new course has adequate dimensions, does not hinder the course of the waters, nor offends the rights of third parties;
b) not executing works or tasks that alter the width and disposition of the bed;
c) proceeding with the cutting or uprooting, according to the circumstances, of trees, shrubs, trunks, and roots that lean over the bed.

ARTICLE 28
(Areas Contiguous to Protection Zones)

In inclined lands near springs, watercourses, or where erosion is prevented or combated, outside the zones subject to the protection regime, the execution of any activities is subject to the prior authorization of the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin and other competent entities.

Such authorization is granted after, mandatorily, the interested entities have been heard, namely those that superintend agricultural and forestry activities, land use planning, and mineral resources.

ARTICLE 29
(Calamities)

It is incumbent upon the State to create and maintain adequate systems for the prevention of calamities, with respect to floods or droughts.

It is incumbent upon users, holders of dams or other hydraulic works, to take preventive measures to avoid or mitigate the consequences of natural disasters, both in the construction phase of installations and in their exploration.

The systems of prevention, alert, and rescue in the case of floods, as well as the prevention and combat of droughts, are governed by specific regulations approved by the Government.

ARTICLE 30
(Requisition)

In cases of force majeure, namely droughts, floods, or other natural calamities, and as long as these persist, local authorities may impose, in the public interest, the common use of the waters of private uses.

It is up to the local authorities to guarantee property rights, defining the access routes, calendar, and other conditions for the use of the requisitioned waters.

The holder of the plot has the right to compensation for the damages caused.

ARTICLE 31
(Easements)

When the right of access and use of water, whether common or private, can only be exercised through the restriction of the property right of another, an easement is constituted.

The classification, methodology of constitution, and the exercise of the right of easement are governed by the provisions of the Civil Code and, subsidiarily, by the applicable regulations.

ARTICLE 32
(Rainwater Drainage and Residual Liquid Sanitation)

Rainwater drainage and residual liquid sanitation are subject to specific regulations.

ARTICLE 33
(Subordination of Priority of Private Uses)

Common uses, as provided in articles 21 and 22, have priority over any private uses, and therefore, private uses may not be granted or maintained to the detriment of those.

The supply of water to the population, for human consumption and satisfaction of sanitary needs, has priority over other private uses.

Conflicts arising from the lack of water for the satisfaction of distinct objectives are resolved based on the socio-economic profitability and environmental impact of the respective uses.

It is incumbent upon the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin to establish, within the framework of the general plan of the basin, the national water plan, this law, and other applicable legislation, the priorities of the private uses of water.

ARTICLE 34
(Methodology and Procedures for Requests)

The methodology and procedures for the granting of any license or concession are contained in a ministerial diploma.

ARTICLE 35
(Rejection of Requests for Private Uses)

Requests for private uses may only be rejected when the existence of any of the following circumstances is proven:
a) there is no available water or the needs to be satisfied are not justified;
b) the satisfaction of the needs compromises the quantitative and qualitative protection of the water, beyond the limits approved for the respective water body;
c) they are incompatible with the uses contained in approved plans;
d) the requested uses result in prejudice to third parties whose rights must be respected;
e) when they are incompatible with the quantities necessary for the protection of the environment.

Those harmed by the granting of a license or concession request may appeal based on the provision of paragraph d) of the preceding number.

ARTICLE 36
(Public Consultation)

Under the terms of the regulations, the base projects that integrate the process of requesting a license or concession are mandatorily submitted to prior public consultation, especially of user associations, local authorities, social organizations, and other entities directly interested in the use of water resources in the geographical area where the activity is to be carried out.

Public consultation does not extinguish the requirements of a technical, safety, economic, and environmental viability nature, as well as what is established in the water resource use schemes.

ARTICLE 37
(Rights of Users)

The right to private use confers upon its holder the possibility, within the stipulated period, of making the use that has been determined for him, and for that purpose, may carry out the necessary works and, under the terms that may be established, temporarily occupy neighboring lands and constitute easements.

The right mentioned above is attributed with the reservation of pre-existing common uses and the rights of third parties, and may be revised under the terms of this law.

ARTICLE 38
(Transmission of the Right to Use)

Waters granted for agricultural, livestock, or industrial purposes are transmitted together with the right to use and exploit the land where these exploitations are established and under the same conditions.

Without prejudice to the provision of the preceding number, the right to private use of waters is transmitted, between the living and by death of the holder, in favor of the heirs under the terms of civil law.

The transmission of the right to use water does not involve the extension of the term of the license or concession.

ARTICLE 39
(General Obligations of Users)

The general obligations of users are:
a) to respect the conditions established in the title of the right;
b) to use the water rationally, giving it only the established destination;
c) to proceed with the punctual payment of the stipulated fees and charges;
d) to participate in tasks of common interest, namely those aimed at preventing the deterioration of the quantity and quality of the water and soil;
e) to provide the information requested by the competent entities and to permit and facilitate the necessary inspections;
f) to guarantee, under the terms of the license or concession, the minimization of negative environmental impacts;
g) to respect the rights of other legitimate users of the waters.

ARTICLE 40
(Abuse of Right)

The exercise of the right to use water that manifestly exceeds the limits imposed by the social or economic purpose of that right, by good faith, and by good customs is abusive and consequently illegitimate.

ARTICLE 41
(Subject Matter)

The private use of water depends on licensing when its utilization does not significantly alter the quality and quantity of the water and the environmental balance, under the terms established in regulation.

Licensing is also required for:
a) the prospection, capture, and use of subterranean waters, except as provided in paragraph c) of no. 1 of article 26 of this law;
b) the installation of deposits, the implementation of cultures or plantations, and the felling of trees in the beds and banks of continuous or discontinuous natural currents and of lakes, ponds, and swamps;
c) the extraction of materials, namely sand and gravel, from the beds and banks of continuous and discontinuous natural currents and of lakes, ponds, and swamps.

ARTICLE 42
(Attribution of Licenses)

The attribution of licenses is the competence of the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin or of the local authorities, under the terms of the regulations.

ARTICLE 43
(Terms of the License)

The right to private use of water by means of licensing is attributed for a period not exceeding 15 years, subject to renewal.

ARTICLE 44
(Rights of the License Holder)

The license holder has the right to freely exercise the licensed activity, within the limits fixed in the respective title, without prejudice to the public interest.

ARTICLE 45
(Duties of the License Holder)

The license holder has the following duties:
a) to exercise the licensed activity within the limits provided for in the respective license title;
b) to comply with the legal and regulatory provisions;
c) to act with complete transparency of procedures in the exercise of the activity;
d) to permit and facilitate inspection of the activity by the competent entities.

ARTICLE 46
(Extinction of Licenses)

Licenses are extinguished by:
a) lapse;
b) revocation;
c) withdrawal by the license holder.

ARTICLE 47
(Reversion of Assets)

Once the license is extinguished, the assets installed on the public domain or that have been acquired by expropriation revert to the State, unless the State expresses a contrary will.

The reversion referred to in the preceding number confers upon the license holder the right to compensation, except in the cases provided for in paragraphs a), b), and d) of no. 1 of article 49 of this law.

Assets considered to be of no productive interest must be removed, taking into account the preservation of the environment, with the costs of this removal being borne by the licensed entity.

ARTICLE 48
(Suspension of the Licensed Activity)

The suspension of the exercise of the licensed activity requires authorization from the licensing entity, except in cases of activities for strictly private purposes.

ARTICLE 49
(Revocation of the License)

Licenses are revocable, namely on the following grounds:
a) non-compliance with the essential obligations fixed in the license;
b) abuse of the exercise of the right or violation of the rights of third parties;
c) public interest in destining the water to other private uses;
d) force majeure, namely droughts, floods, or other natural calamities of prolonged effects.

The grounds provided for in paragraphs c) and d) of the preceding number only determine the revocation of the license when the needs cannot be satisfied by the simple requisition of part of the licensed flows.

ARTICLE 50
(Subject Matter)

The private use of water is subject to the concession regime in all cases not provided for in articles 26 and 41 of this law.

ARTICLE 51
(Rights Associated with Concessions)

Concessions are granted, temporarily, for a period of 50 years, subject to renewal.

The granting of the concession implies the authorization to use the lands necessary for the execution of the works and convenient exploration of the concession, in accordance with the approved projects, upon payment of the due fees and indemnities.

The rights arising from the concession and the installations over which these rights are exercised cannot be assigned or encumbered separately from the concession that originated them, without the authorization of the entity that granted it.

ARTICLE 52
(Reversion of Assets of the Concession)

Once the concession is extinguished, all the installations and assets that integrate it revert to the State.

The reversion of assets in favor of the State may determine, except in case of rescission, the payment of an indemnity to the concessionaire, whose calculation criteria are fixed in the concession contract and applicable legislation.

ARTICLE 53
(Approval and Attribution of Concessions)

The approval and attribution of concessions is the competence of the Government under the terms of the law.

ARTICLE 54
(Rights of Concessionaires)

The rights of concessionaires are:
a) to explore the concession under the terms of the respective contract;
b) to constitute easements and request the expropriation of immovable property or rights attached thereto, necessary for the realization of the purposes provided for in the contract, as well as to use assets of the public or private domain of the State, under the terms to be agreed upon in the respective concession contract;
c) all those conferred upon them by law, relative to the conditions of exploration of the concession.

ARTICLE 55
(Duties of the Concessionaire)

The duties of the concessionaire are:
a) to comply with the legal and regulatory norms in force;
b) to comply with the obligations arising from the concession contract;
c) to permit and facilitate inspection by the State;
d) to pay the indemnities due for the constitution of easements and expropriation of rights;
e) not to assign, alienate, or encumber parts of the concession, without authorization from the granting entity;
f) to assume responsibility for damages resulting from non-compliance or defective compliance with its obligations;
g) to guarantee, in a permanent manner, the quality of the water, carrying out periodic analyses by specialized laboratories, under the regulatory terms.

ARTICLE 56
(Revision of the Concession)

The concession may be revised:
a) when the determining assumptions for its attribution have been modified;
b) in case of force majeure, namely droughts, floods, or other natural calamities of prolonged effects;
c) at the request of the concessionaire.

When the revision is made under the provision of paragraph a) of the preceding number, the concessionaire has the right to indemnity, in accordance with the regime of expropriations for public utility.

The expenses, including those arising from the substitution of all or part of the attributed flows for others of different origin, may be shared among the new beneficiaries.

ARTICLE 57
(Forms of Extinction of Concessions)

The concession is extinguished:
a) by lapse;
b) by agreement between the parties;
c) by the disappearance of the need for the use of the water, or by the exhaustion of the resource through the irreversible and accentuated decrease of the flow, or by the degradation of its characteristics;
d) by revocation or by rescission.

ARTICLE 58
(Causes for Revocation)

It is incumbent upon the entity that granted the concession to revoke it when any of the following circumstances occurs:
a) non-compliance with the essential obligations or terms provided for in the concession;
b) abuse of the exercise of the right to use water or violation of the rights of third parties;
c) permanent interruption of the exploration of the concession for 12 consecutive months for reasons attributable to its holder;
d) impediment to the exercise of inspection by the State;
e) contamination of the returned waters beyond the fixed values.

The revoking order is subject to appeal and the appeal has a suspensive effect, unless serious prejudice to third parties could result from such effect.

ARTICLE 59
(Redemption)

The entity that has granted the concession may proceed to its redemption when, for reasons of manifest public interest, there is a need to make the granted waters available for other purposes or users.

Redemption is made after 1/3 of the concession period has elapsed.

Redemption dictated under the terms of the preceding numbers gives rise to indemnity.

Redemption is notified to the concessionaire one year in advance, a date from which the concessionaire may not alter, without prior authorization, the contracts included within the scope of the concession.

ARTICLE 60
(Rescission of the Concession)

The culpable and serious violation of the duties of the concessionaire may determine the rescission of the concession contract.

The concessionaire may rescind the contract in the following cases:
a) for reasons of force majeure that persist beyond the periods provided for in the concession contract;
b) by acts of third parties or decision of the public authorities that seriously and demonstrably harm their rights;
c) when the execution of the contract is not economically viable for them.

In case of rescission, under the terms of no. 1 of this article, the assets integrating the concession revert in favor of the State.

The concessionaire only has the right to indemnity in case of rescission for culpable violation of the duties of the State as grantor or by act of the public authorities.

ARTICLE 61
(Fees)

The beneficiaries of the rights of private use of water, subject to license or concession, are obliged to pay fees resulting from the use of the water resource and the discharge of effluent.

They are also obliged to pay fees aimed at promoting adequate practices for the correct use and conservation of water, the prevention of pollution, or the reduction of its level.

ARTICLE 62
(Formation of Fees)

The amount of the fees resulting from the use of the water resource and the discharge of effluent is established according to the measured or estimated volume of water required, as a function of the type or dimension of the activity exercised and the quantity foreseen for private use, as well as the type and volume of the pollutant.

The criteria for the formation of the fees provided for in the preceding number are subject to regulation by the Government.

ARTICLE 63
(Tariffs)

The beneficiaries of the right of private use of water subject to license or concession are subject to the payment of tariffs resulting from the use of hydraulic infrastructures.

The amount of the tariffs resulting from the use of infrastructures is established taking into account, among other factors, the costs incurred with the construction, exploration, and conservation of the works, the total number of beneficiaries, and their average contributory capacity.

The methodology for calculating tariffs is fixed by a specific diploma.

ARTICLE 64
(Research, Capture, and Use)

The research, capture, and use of subterranean waters, whether they spring naturally or not, are subject to the general regime of water utilization established in this law.

The technical requirements to which the research, capture, and use must adhere are fixed by Government regulation.

The provision of the preceding number of this article does not apply to the common uses regulated in article 22 when carried out outside urban perimeters or in urban areas that do not have a public water distribution network, or the supply is deficient.

The exception provided for in the preceding number is established as a function of the estimated potential of the subterranean waters or their importance.

ARTICLE 65
(Restrictions on the Use of Subterranean Water)

The use of subterranean waters is conditioned by:
a) the maintenance, in rechargeable aquifers, of the balance between the renewal of fresh water and extractions, in order to ensure continuous use under the same physical, chemical, and biological conditions;
b) the optimization, in non-rechargeable aquifers, of their use over time, in order to extract the maximum benefit from them;
c) the creation of fluvial protection zones for the reserve and maintenance of aquifers;
d) the integrated management of surface and subterranean waters.

CHAPTER IV
PROTECTION OF WATERS

ARTICLE 66
(Objectives of Protection)

The protection of the waters of the public water domain against pollution essentially aims to:
a) achieve and maintain an adequate level of water quality;
b) prevent the accumulation, in the subsoil, of toxic or dangerous compounds susceptible to contaminating subterranean waters;
c) avoid any other action that may cause degradation of the water environment.

ARTICLE 67
(Prohibited Activities)

The following activities are, in general, prohibited:
a) to carry out, directly or indirectly, discharges that exceed the self-purification capacity of the water bodies;
b) to accumulate solid waste, refuse, or any substances in places and conditions that contaminate or create a danger of water contamination;
c) to carry out any activities that involve or may involve a danger of pollution or degradation of the public water domain;
d) to effect any alteration to the regime, flow, quality, and use of the waters, which may endanger public health, natural resources, and the environment in general, or the security and national sovereignty.

ARTICLE 68
(Prevention and Control)

The discharge of wastewater, waste, or other substances, and any activities susceptible to causing pollution or degradation of the public water domain, is dependent on authorization to be granted by the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the respective basin and other competent authorities.

By regulation, the receiving water bodies are typified, the corresponding quality standards of the effluents are established, and their respective forms of compensation.

With respect to pollution, no acquired rights are recognized, and therefore, discharge authorizations are subject to modifications and restrictions according to public and environmental needs, it being incumbent upon their holders the responsibility for altering the technological methods and processes or others, resulting from these modifications and restrictions.

Whenever necessary, deadlines are fixed for the progressive adaptation of polluting activities, and these may be suspended or the establishments closed as long as the adequate measures are not implemented.

ARTICLE 69
(Responsibility of the Polluter)

Whoever, beyond the consented limits, causes pollution of the waters, regardless of fault and the applicable sanction, is under the obligation, at their own expense, to restore the situation prior to the verification of the event that requires reparation.

ARTICLE 70
(Quality Control)

It is incumbent upon the individuals or collective entities in charge of supplying water for consumption to ensure that the facilities used and the water supplied respect the requirements fixed by law.

It is incumbent upon the supervisory body to carry out the inspection and control of the quality of potable water and to define, namely:
a) the modalities for carrying out the controls of the capture, treatment, storage, transport, and distribution of water installations;
b) the potability parameters of the water, the modalities for carrying out the controls or analyses, as well as the methods and products used in the treatment and correction of the waters;
c) the special protection measures to be adopted in exceptional situations;
d) the sanitary control to which the means and workers assigned to the treatment, transport, and distribution of water for consumption are subject.

ARTICLE 71
(Protection Zones)

The zones adjacent to water springs and wells, the locations and respective adjacent areas where water captures for consumption are installed, subject to licensing or concession, the banks of artificial lakes and the respective adjacent areas, are subject to the regime of protection areas defined in the legislation on land.

The regulatory diploma that institutes the protection zone establishes the limits within which such protection is exercised and enumerates the restrictions and conditions to be observed in the use and exploitation of the land.

In the referred protection zones, in addition to the restrictions and conditions dictated by the specificity of each case, it is generally prohibited:
a) to build housing or buildings whose realization may lead to the degradation of water quality;
b) to install industrial or commercial establishments, slaughterhouses, or livestock fences;
c) to install graves or make excavations;
d) to install dumps or spoil heaps resulting from mining activity;
e) to introduce animals, deposit or bury garbage or waste of any kind;
f) to install pipelines and reservoirs for hydrocarbons or used waters of any kind;
g) to establish crop lands and spread manure, fertilizers, or any other product intended for the fertilization of soils or the protection of crops.

CHAPTER V
INFRACTIONS

ARTICLE 72
(Infractions and Indemnities)

Under the terms of the regulations and other applicable legislation and without prejudice to civil or criminal proceedings where applicable, the following constitute administrative infractions:
a) acts that cause damage to the public water domain;
b) non-compliance with the conditions imposed for the use of water;
c) the diversion of water from its beds and the research, capture, and use of subterranean waters in violation of the provisions of the law;
d) the execution, without prior authorization, of works, tasks, cultures, or plantations in the beds and in the zones subject to restrictions;
e) the extraction or deposit of materials in the water bodies, their beds, banks, and protected areas, without prior authorization;
f) the failure to comply with the prohibitions and restrictions established in this law, or the omission of the conditions imposed therein;
g) the modification of the characteristics of the license or concession without prior and express authorization from the granting entity.

The infractions mentioned in number 1 oblige the offender to indemnify the injured parties, under the terms of civil liability.

ARTICLE 73
(Sanctions)

To the infractions provided for in this law, fines or other administrative sanctions are applicable under the terms of the regulations.

The costs of demolition of works constructed without a license, or contrary to what has been established and from which results prejudice to the conservation, regularization, and regime of the watercourses, lakes, ponds, swamps, and subterranean waters, or that cause prejudice to third parties, are borne by the offender.

ARTICLE 74
(Inspection)

Without prejudice to the competencies of other entities, it is incumbent upon the supervisory body, the institutions responsible for the management of water resources of the basin, and the local authorities, under the terms of the regulations, to:
a) ensure the good regime of water use and prevent the violation of the rights of third parties, beyond the faculty that is recognized to them to resort to the competent courts;
b) inspect places, buildings, and equipment and request the necessary information and clarifications;
c) impose the demolition of works, the closure of establishments and pollution sources, and the cessation of unauthorized activities;
d) inspect the execution of works, their conservation, and safety, as well as the exploration of licenses and concessions, obliging their holders to comply with the conditions imposed on the use of waters.

CHAPTER VI
FINAL AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 75
(Acquired Rights)

The rights to the private use of water already existing at the date of publication of this law are maintained as long as they do not contradict it, and may be extinguished or restricted for compatibility with its provisions.

The recognition of acquired rights may be claimed from the institution responsible for the management of water resources of the basin within a period of three years from the entry into force of this law, it being incumbent upon the interested parties to provide the necessary information and clarifications.

The claims presented after the expiry of the period established in the preceding number are considered as new requests for water use, being subject to the regime established in this law.

ARTICLE 76
(Obligations Resulting from International Commitments)

The provisions of this law do not prejudice the obligations resulting from international commitments assumed under agreements and treaties regularly celebrated and ratified at the date of its publication.

ARTICLE 77
(Doubts and Omissions)

Doubts and omissions that arise from the interpretation and application of this law are resolved by the National Assembly.

ARTICLE 78
(Revocation of Legislation)

All regulations and provisions that contradict the provisions of this law are revoked, especially the provisions contained in Chapter IV of Title II and Section II of Chapter III of Title VI of Book III of the Civil Code and the Overseas Water Law approved by Decree No. 35463 of January 23, 1946, as well as the provisions of Law No. 1/92, of January 17 - Law of Geological and Mining Activities with regard to subterranean waters, spring waters, mineral waters, mineral-medicinal waters, and table waters.

ARTICLE 79
(Regulation)

This law must be regulated by the Government within a period of 120 days.

ARTICLE 80
(Entry into Force)

This law enters into force on the date of its publication.

ANNEX REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4 OF THE WATER LAW

Water: - Liquid phase of a compound constituted approximately of 2 parts hydrogen and 16 parts oxygen by weight. In nature, it contains small quantities of heavy water, gases, and solids (salts) in dissolution.

Potable water: - Water that meets certain physical, chemical, and biological characteristics that confer upon it a satisfactory quality for human consumption.

Subterranean waters: - Waters found in the subsoil.

Freshwater: - Natural water, with a low concentration of salts or generally considered adequate, after treatment, to produce potable water.

Mineral-medicinal waters: - Waters used for therapeutic purposes.

Thermal waters: - Mineral, hot waters, usable for therapeutic purposes.

Rainwater: - Part of the precipitation that flows or is stored on the soil surface.

Wastewater: - Water discharged after being used for domestic or industrial purposes.

Aquifers: - Permeable formations that contain and transmit subterranean waters in sufficient quantities to permit their exploitation.

Hydrographic basin: - Geographic area receiving rainwater that forms the surface runoff that feeds a thalweg (watercourse or river).

Flow rate: - Quantity of water that passes through a given cross-section of a watercourse in a unit of time.

Water body: - Mass of water that is not only considered as a vehicle or substance that can be used or consumed, but also as an environment conducive to life.

Drainage: - Natural or artificial flow of a flooded terrain that moves to the receiving surface which is at a lower elevation.

Effluent: - (Discharge or rejection) quantity of water, with the materials and energy it contains, after its utilization, which are emitted from the territorial boundaries of an activity and are released into a surface, subterranean aquifer, or into a public sanitation network.

Bank: - Land that borders a river or current of water.

Bed or channel: - Depression of the terrain where a course of water runs.

Calamity: - Great evil, common to many people, that accompanies external hydrological phenomena, floods, and droughts.

Hydrological cycle: - Succession of phases through which water passes in its movement from the atmosphere to the earth and its return to the same: evaporation of water from the soil, from the sea, condensation of water in the form of clouds, precipitation, accumulation in the soil or in a mass of water, and re-evaporation.

Concession: - Temporary transfer made by a legal person of public law of the exclusive rights of exploitation of a public service, administratively conferring upon another the right to explore or utilize a public good.

Water contamination: - Particular case of pollution caused by the introduction of elements in concentrations harmful to health (human and animal) such as pathogenic organisms, toxic and radioactive substances in watercourses.

Spills: - Waters abandoned after their use, coming from a property.

Flood: - Overflow of water outside its place of confinement.

Supervisory body: - Body responsible for the execution of the Water Resources Policy of the Government of Angola - (Ministry of Energy and Water or its successor).

Well: - Opening of the ground through natural mechanical means in order to permit the capture of subterranean water.

Easement: - Right that allows the enjoyment of a utility through the use of the priorities of another, being in the case of the use of waters, the right to the waters constituting a benefit of a determined property.

Reversion of assets: - Restitution of assets to the original owner when requested by him or his heirs, provided always that these assets have not been used for the purpose whose public utility justified the expropriation or before the lapse of the right that gave rise to the expropriation.

Public utility: - Aptitude of things to satisfy collective needs resulting exclusively from the law, through a declaration of public utility.

Inland waters: - Surface waters (considering from the baseline) and subterranean waters existing on the continental shelf under the domain of the Angolan State.

Water Resources: - Resources in available or potentially available waters in quantity and quality, in the appropriate place and moment to satisfy an identified demand.