

--- PAGE 1 ---

No.6ofl976 
The Water and Sewerage Corporation Act, 1976. 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
PARTI 
Preliminary 
J. 
Short title and commencement 
2. 
Interpretation 
.3. 
Statement as to water-rights and administration of water 
PART II 
Establishment of Water and Sewerage Corporation 
4. 
Establishment of Corporation 
5. 
Functions of Corporation 
6. 
Powers of Corporation 
7. 
Power of Minister 
PART III 
Financial Provisions 
8. 
Funds and resources of the Corporation 
9. 
Borrowing powers 
IO, 
Advances, and guarantee of borrowings, by the Government 
11. 
Payment of the interest on, advances and sums issued to meet 
guarantees 
12. 
Surplus Funds 
13. 
Reserve Fund 
14. 
Balancing of revenue account, and ,surplus revenue 
15. 
Accounts and Audit. 
PART JV 
Transfer to Corporation or Government Installations 
16. 
Transfer to Corporation of Government Installations 
17. 
Existing contracts 
18. 
Existing liabilities 


--- PAGE 2 ---

PARTV 
Water-Supply 
19. 
Maintenance of water-supply 
20. 
Corporation's discretion to supply 
21. 
Connection of new premises 
22. 
Connection of existing premises 
23. 
Power to cut off water-supply 
24. 
Damages to meter and fraudulent connection 
PART VI 
Sewerage 
25. 
Power of Minister of Health 
26. 
Application and Interpretation 
27. 
Discharge of insanitary fluids 
28. 
Notice to construct house-sewers 
29. 
New premises to be connected to sewerage system 
30. 
No connections without consent 
31. 
Trade waste· 
32. 
Misuse of system 
33. 
Design of house-sewers 
34. 
Installation of fixtures 
35. 
Connections 
PART VII 
Miscellaneous 
36. 
Exemption from payment of duties 
37. 
Wilful damage 
38. 
Prosecutions 
39. 
Regulations 
40. 
Penalties 
41. 
Repeal and saving 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
THIRD SCHEDULE 


--- PAGE 3 ---

No. 6of 1976 
An Act to establish a Water and Sewerage Corporation for the 
grant and control of water rights, the 
protection of water 
resources, regulating the extraction, use and si.lpply of water, 
the disposal of sewage and for connected purposes. 
(Assented to: 6th July, 1976) 
BE it enacted by The Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and 
with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of 
Assembly of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, and by the 
authority of the same, as follows: -
PARTI 
Preliminary 
l. 
This Act may be cited as the Water and Sewerage Cor-
l>Oration Act, 1976 and shall come into operation on such date as the 
Minister may appoint by notice published in the Gazette. 
2. 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires -
"this Act" includes the regulations made under this Act; 
"area of supply" means the area to which the water supply of 
the Corporation extends; 
"the Board" Illf'ans the Board of the Corporation; 
"Corporation" means the Water and Sewerage Corporation 
established under section 4; 
"Government" means the Government of The Bahamas; 
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for Water and 
Sewerage; 
"sewerage system" includes any street-sewer, pumping 
station, pumping machinery, deposit tank, outfall pipe and 
any appliance for the conveyance or disposal of sewage; 
8lort title and 
commencement. 
Interpretation. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

Statement as to 
water-rilhts 
and 
ad-
ministration of 
water. 
First Schedule. 
Establishment 
of Corporatioo. 
Second 
Schedule. 
Functions 
of 
Corporation. 
Powers 
of 
Corporation. 
2 
"water-supply system" includes any reservoir, dam, tank, well, 
tunnel, conduit, pipe, fountain, sluice, valve, pump or 
engine and any building, structure or appliance used or 
constructed for the supply, stomge, conveyance or 
regulation of water. 
3.-(1) Water is a national resource of the Commonwealth of 
The Bahamas. 
(2) 
All private rights in water shall be subject to the superior 
right of the Government to control and administer the marketing, 
production and extraction and use of water in the public interest. 
(3) 
The control and administration of water shall, in the 
islands or parts thereof specified in the First Schedule, be exercised 
by the Corporation on behalf of the Government, and in the islands 
not so specified by fhe Minister. 
(4) 
The Minister may, by order, amend the First Schedule. 
PART II 
Establishment of Water and Sewerage Corporation 
4. -(1) There is established a Corporation to be known as the 
Water and Sewerage Corporation. 
( 2) 
The Second Schedule shall have effect with respect to the 
incorporation, constitution, proceedings and staff of the Corporation 
and otherwise in relation thereto. 
5. 
The functions of the Corporation shall be -
( a) to control and ensure the optimum development and 
use of the water resources of the Commonwealth of 
The Bahamas; 
(b) to ensure the co-ordination of all activities which may 
influence the quality, quantity, distribution or use of 
water; 
(c) to ensure the application of appropriate standards and 
techniques for 
the 
investigation, 
use, 
control, 
protection, management and administration of water; 
( d) to provide adequate supplies of suitable water for 
domestic use, for livestock, for frrigation and 
agricultural purposes, for urban and industrial use; 
(e) to provide adequate facilities for drainage, the sate 
disposal of sewage and industrial effluents. 
6. -(1) The Corporation shall have all the powers necessary for 
the carrying out of its functions and, in particular, without limiting 
the generality of the foregoing, may -


--- PAGE 5 ---

3 
(a) direct or empower, subject to such qualifications or 
restrictions as it may determine, any person or any 
public authority to undertake any action which it 
deems necessary to the satisfactory execution of its 
functions; 
(b) determine the allocation of available water between 
different users or types of use in any area within its 
jurisdiction; 
(c) enter any land for any of the following purposes -
(i) carrying out water and sewerage surveys and 
investigations; 
(ii) carrying out trial drilling and inspection for 
ground water and sewerage; 
(iii) executing any works, laying and connecting 
pipes for water and sewers: 
(iv) inspecting existing water uses and structures 
and monitoring waste discharge; 
(v) demolishing any unauthorized 
water or 
sewerage works: 
(vi) effecting repairs to the water-supply and 
sewerage systems, 
and for these purposes close up roads and divert traffic; 
(d) design, construct, operate and maintain water works, 
and authorize and control th" construction, operation 
and maintenance by any person of water works; 
(e) acquire any property which it deems necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of constructing, extending 
or maintaining any water works or otherwise carrying 
out its functions under this Act; 
(f) require the installation of meters or gauges for 
measuring water used or waste discharged and levy 
charges for the provision, installation, maintenance 
and operation of the same; 
(g) extract water from any part of The Bahamas for the 
purpose of supplying the·area within its control and 
administration and for so extracting water enter into 
such agreements, and construct, maintain and operate 
such works, as may be necessary; 
( h) prescribe and collect rates and service fees and 
deposits in respect of the distribution and supply of 
water and the disposal of sewage. 
(2) 
The powers of entry given under paragraph (1) (c) shall (in 
relation to private land) not be exercised unless at a reasonable hour 
and unless the person seeking entry holds a written letter of 
authority issued by, or on behalf of, the Corporation. 


--- PAGE 6 ---

4 
(3) In the exel'Cise of its powers under this section, the Cor-
poration, or person authorised by it, shall make as little damage as 
possible and shall restore the land or street, as the case may be, to 
its former condition or to as near that condition as is possible. 
( 4) The acquisition of land in pursuance of plll"Sgraph (I) ( e) 
shall be deemed to be for a "public purpose" within the meaning of 
a.. ,,._ 
section 2 of the Acquisition of Land Act, and that Act shall apply to 
such acquisition. 
Power 
Minister. 
• r 
7. -(1) The Minister may, after consultation with the Board, 
give to the Corporation such directions in writing whetlrer of a 
general or specific character as to the discharge of its functions as 
appear to the Minister to be requisite in the public interest and the 
Corporation shall give effect to any such directions. 
(2) The Corporation shall furnish the Minister with such 
returns, accounts and other information as he may from time to time 
require with respect to the property and activities of the Corporation 
and shall afford to him facilities for verifying such information in 
such manner and at such time as he may requin!. 
PART III 
Financial Provisions 
Fund, 
and 
8. 
The funds and resources of the Corporation shall consist 
resources of the 
Cort>oration. 
of -
Bomiwina 
........ 
(a) such moneys as may be provided by Parliament; 
( b) such moneys as may from time to time accrue to the 
Corporation from its operations; 
(c) such moneys as may from time to time be borrowed by 
the Corporation pursuant to section 9; 
( d) such moneys as may from time to time be advanced to 
the Corporation pursuant to section 10; 
(e1 such other moneys and property as may in any 
manner be lawfully paid to or vested in the Cor-
poration whether or not in respect of any matter in-
cidental to its functions. 
9. -(1) Subject to this section, the Corporation may borrow 
sums required by it for meeting any of its obligations or discharging 
any of its functions and may in respect of such borrowing, issue 
debentures in such form as the Corporation may determine. 
( 2) The power of the Corporation to borrow shall be exercisable 
only with the approval of the Minister, given with the consent of the 
Minister of Finance, as to the amount, as to the /JJOurces of the 
borrowing and as to the terms on which the borrowing may be ef· 
fected. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

5 
( 3) 
An approval given in any respect for the purposes of this 
subsection may be either general or limited to a particular borrowing 
or otherwise and may be either unconditional or subject to con-
ditions_ 
( 4} A person lending money to the Corporation shall not be 
bound to inquire whether the borrowing of the money is within the 
power of the Corporation_ 
10--(1} Subject to subsection (3), for the purposes of enabling 
the Corporation to defray expenditure properly chargeable to capital 
account, including provision of working capital, the Minister of 
Finance may, at the request of the Minister, make advances to the 
Corporation_ 
(2) 
Subject to subsection (3), the Minister of Finance may, on 
behalf of the Government, at the request of the Minister, guarantee, 
in such manner and on such conditions as he thinks fit, the 
repayment of the principal of, and the payment of interest and other 
charges on, any authorized borrowings of the Corporation made 
otherwise than by way of advance under subsection ( 1 ). 
(3) No advance shall be made and no guarantees shall be given 
under this section unless prior approval thereof has been signified by 
the House of Assembly in accordance with section 17 of the Financial 
Advances. and 
guarantee 
of 
oor,-ow\ngs. by 
the 
Govern-
Administration and Audit Act, 1973. 
'.':o. 21 of Hm 1 
( 4) 
Where any sum is issued for fulfilling a guarantee given 
under this section, the Minister of Finance shall, as soon as possible 
after the end of each financial year beginning with that in which the 
sum is issued and ending with that in which all liability in. respect of 
the principal of the sum and in respect of interest thereon is finally 
discharged, lay before each House of Parliament a statement relating 
to that sum_ 
( 5) 
Any sums required by the Minister of Finance for fulfilling 
a guarantee under this Act of borrowing of the Corporation shall be 
charged on and issued out of the Consolidated Fund-
11. -(1) The Corporation shall make to the Minister of 
Finance at such times and in such manner as the Minister may with 
the approval of the Minister of Finance direct, payments of such 
amounts as he may so direct in or towards repayment of advances 
made to the Corporation under section 10 and of any sums issued in 
fulfillment of any guarantee given thereunder, and payments of 
interest on what is outstanding for the time being in respect of such 
3dvam.·< 
and of any sums so issued at such rate as he may so 
direct, and different rates of interest may be directed as respects 
different advances or sums and as respects interest for different 
periods. 
l'a,;menl 
or. 
and interest on. 
advances 
and 
sums issued to 
meet 
guarantees. 


--- PAGE 8 ---

6 
(2) The Minister shall lay before each House of Parliament a 
statement of any payment due from the Corporation under sub-
section ( l) which is not duly paid as required hereunder. 
swcolus 
fwuls. 
12.-(1) Subject to subsection (2), any moneys standing to the 
Reserve Fund. 
Balancing of 
revenue ac-
count. and 
surplus 
revenue. 
credit of the Corporation and not required for any current purpose (in 
this section referred to as "surplus funds") may from time to time 
either be carried to any reserve fund established under section 13 or 
be invested by the Corporation in securities approved either 
generally or specifically by the Minister; and the Corporation may 
from time to time, with the like approval, sell any or all of such 
securities. 
(2) 
No surplus funds shall be carried to reserve or invested 
under subsection ( l) without the consent of the Minister of Finance, 
and the Minister of Finance may, notwithstanding section 7(1), 
direct that the whole or any part of any surplus funds shall be paid 
into the Consolidated Fund. 
13. -( 11 
The Corporation shall establish a reserve fund. 
(2) 
Subject to subsection (3), the management of the said fund, 
the sums to be carried from time to time to the credit thereof, and the 
application thereof, shall be as the Corporation may determine: 
Provided that -
(a) no part of the said fund shall be applied otherwise 
than for the purposes of the Corporation; and 
(bf the power of the Minister to give directions to the 
Corporation shall extend to the giving to it, with the 
approval of the Minister of Finance, of directions as to 
any matter relating to the establishment or 
management of the said fund, the carrying of sums to 
the credit thereof, or the application thereof, not-
withstanding that the directions may be of a specific 
character. 
(3) 
Notwithstanding section 7( 11, the Minister of Finance may 
at any time direct that any part of the reserve fund established under 
subsection ( 1) shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund. 
14. -(1) It shall be the duty of the Corporation so to discharge 
its functions as to secure that its revenues are not less than sufficient 
to meet all sums properly chargeable to its revenue account (in-
cluding, without prejudice to the generality of that expression, 
provisions in respect of its obligations under section 12 and this 
section) taking one year with another. 
(2) 
Any excess of the revenue of the Corporation for any 
financial year over the sum properly chargeable to its revenue ac-


--- PAGE 9 ---

7 
count for that year (including the provisions referred to in subsection 
(I) shall be applied by the Corporation for such purposes as it may 
determine with the approval of the Minister given with the rnnsenl 
of the Minister of Finance. 
15.-(1) The Corporation shall keep proper accounts and other 
records in relation thereto, and shall prepare in respect of each 
financial year a statement of accounts in such form as the Minister 
may with the approval of the Minister of Finance direct. 
(2) 
The Minister shall lay a copy of every such statement of 
accounts before each House of Parliament, together with a copy of 
any report made by the auditors on the statement or on the accounts. 
PART IV 
Transfer to Corporation of Government Installations 
16.-(1) Upon the commencement of this Act all installations 
within the area of control and administration of the Corporation. 
which, immediately before the ccmmencement of this Act, were the 
property of the Government or were vested in any person for and on 
behalf of the Government or were operated by or on behalf of the 
Government in connection with the water-supply and sewerage 
systems shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and shall vest 
in, the Corporation. 
(2) 
The transfer shall extend to the whole of the installations 
and shall include all plant, lands, works and other property, movable 
or immovable, assets, powers, rights or privileges held or enjoyed in 
connection therewith or appertaining thereto. 
(3) 
Where the area of the Corporation's control and ad-
ministration is extended by an order under section 3, subsections (1) 
and (2) shall apply to the extended area upon the commencement of 
the order. 
17. 
All deeds, bonds, agreements and instruments subsisting 
immediately before the commencement of this Act and affecting the 
water-supply and sewerage systems within the area of control and 
administration of the Corporation shall be as effective against or in 
favour of the Corporation as if, instead of the Government or person 
acting on behalf of the Government, the Corporation had been named 
therein or had been a party thereto. 
18. 
Notwithstanding sections 16 and 17, existing liabilities or 
debts incurred at the date of commencement of this Act in relation to 
any Government installation transferred under this Act or in relation 
to any deed, bond, agreement or instrument binding the Corporation 
by virtue of section 17 shall be liabilities and debts of the Govern-
ment. 
.\<TnUn!s 
,\udit 
Translt•r 
: 11 
C ·orpor;Hiun 
ol 
(i11\1>rnr111·n1 
mst.i\la',i11m, 
Existing 
tracts. 
Existing 
lia,bilities. 
«>n-


--- PAGE 10 ---

Maintenance of 
water-supply. 
Corporation's 
discretion 
to 
supPly. 
Connection 
of 
new premises. 
8 
PARTV 
Water-Supply 
19. 
The Corporation shall continue to maintain and extend the 
water-supply and sewerage systems in the area within its control and 
administration. 
20. -(1) The Corporation may agree to supply or to continue 
to supply water to any person upon such terms ancl conditions and 
for such period as the Corporation may think fit, which terms and 
conditions may, in particular, include provision for the furnishing of 
such security as the Corporation may require for the payment of 
water supplied or to be supplied. 
(2) 
Notwithstanding any agreement of the Corporation to 
supply water, the Corporation may diminish, withhold or suspend, 
stop, tum off or divert the supply of water whenever the Corporation 
may think fit and without compensation for any loss or damage 
which may result -
(a) whenever the available supply of water shall, in the 
opinion of the Corporation, be insufficient; 
( b) whenever it may be expedient or necessary for the 
purpose of connecting, extending, altering or repairing 
the water-supply system. 
(3) 
Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Corporation may 
restrict the purposes to which the water supplied is to be applied. 
(4) 
Any person who uses water for a restricted purpose shall be 
guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 1,000 dollars or to im-
prisonment for a term of six months or both such fine and im-
prisonment. 
21.-(1) If new or reconstructed premises of a floor area of 
more than 450 squa,-e feet and situate within 200 yards of any service 
pipe or main are erected or reconstructed in an area of supply sub-
sequent to the commencement of this Act, the owner of the premises 
shall make application to the Corporation for the supply of water. 
(2) 
The application shall be made before occupation of the 
premises. 
(3) 
Upon the application being granted the owner shall, at his 
own expense cause the premises to be connected to the water-supply 
system. 
(4) 
On failure or neglect by the owner to cause the premises to 
be connected to the water-supply system before occupation of the 
premises, the Corporation may enter into the premises at any 
reasonable hour and connect the same and the expense thereof shall 


--- PAGE 11 ---

9 
become a debt due from and owing by the owner to the Corporation 
and a charge upon the premises, and in addition thereto the owner 
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 500 dollars or 
imprisonment for a term of three months or both such fine and 
imprisonment. 
22. -(1) The Corporation may, by notice in writing, require the 
owner of any existing premises having a floor area of more than 450 
square feet and situate within 200 yards of any of the Corporation's 
supply pipes or mains, to connect at his own expense the premises to 
the water-supply system within such period as the Corporation may 
allow: 
Provided that the Corporation shall suspend or revoke the 
notice if the Corporation is satisfied that the cost of connection will 
cause unreasonable hardship to the owner of the building. 
( 2) 
On failure or neglect by the owner to cause the premises to 
be connected to the water-supply system within the period allowed, 
the Corporation may enter into the premises at any reasonable hour 
and connect the same and the expense thereof shall become a debt 
due from ancl owing by the owner to the Corporation and a charge 
upon the premises and in addition the owner shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine of 500 dollars or to imprisonment for a 
term of three months or both such fine and imprisonment. 
23. -(1) If a person entitled to a supply of water under an 
agreement with the Corporation makes default in payment of any 
sum due and owing to the Corporation, the Corporation may, after 
the expiration of 30 days from the date upon which notice that the 
supply will be cut shall have been served upon the person, cut off 
the water-supply until payment of the sum due and of any expense 
incurred by the Corporation is made. 
(2) 
If at any time after the water-supply has been cut off from 
any premises the owner or occupier of the premises shall fraudulently 
obtain a renewal of supply without the order of the Corporation, the 
owner or occupier of the premises, as the case may be, shall be guilty 
of an offence and liable to a fine of 50 dollars in respect of each day 
during which the supply shall have been so renewed. 
24. 
Any person who -
(al wilfully injures or fraudulently alters any meter; 
(b) without the written consent of the Corporation 
connects or causes to be connected any water pipe, 
pump or reservoir to any water pipe, pump or 
reservoir belonging to the Corporation, 
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 1,000 dollars or to 
imprisonment for a term of six months or both such line and im-
prisonment. 
Connection ol 
existing 
premises. 
Power to cut off 
water-supply_ 
Damages 
to 
meler 
and 
fraudulent 
connection 


--- PAGE 12 ---

PART VI 
Sewerage 
Pow er 
Minister 
Health. 
of 
25. 
The Minister of Health shall enforce the provisions of this 
of 
Application and 
Interpretation. 
Part in respect of any house-sewer or sanitary-fixture, and in respect 
of any escape of water (not being storm water), dirt or other offensive 
matter, from any premises, and for such purpose may enter into any 
premises at any reasonable hour and inspect the same. 
26.-(1) This Part shall apply to New Providence only. 
(2) 
For the purposes of this Part -
"house-sewer" includes any sewer conduit, pipe, manhole, 
flushing-chamber, inspection chamber or other appliance 
connecting any sanitary fixture with any street sewer up to 
the property line of the premises, or, where the street sewer 
is constructed within the premises, up to the street sewer; 
"sanitary fixture" includes any bath, bidet, drinking fountain, 
lavatory sink, laundry tray, water closet, wind, cistern, 
flushing tank, floor drain, trap, vent, piping or other ap-
pliance used for the collection and conveyance of sewage or 
fluid house refuse to the hciuse-sewer, or the venting 
thereof; 
"street-sewer" includes any sewer, pipe, manhole, gully, 
flushing tank, ventilating opening or shaft constructed or 
maintained by the Corporation. 
Discharge 
insanitary 
fluids. 
of 
27. -(1) No person shall cause or allow to be discharged into 
:-.IO { i Ce 
t O 
construct 
house-sewers 
any street or storm water drain any sewage, waste water or other 
fluid house refuse. 
(2) 
Any person who contravenes subsection (1) after receipt of 
a notice in writing from the Minister of Health to cease contravening 
the subsection, shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 
1,000 dollars or to imprisonment for a term of six months or to both 
such fine and imprisonment and to a fine of 50 dollars in respect of 
every day, after receipt of the notice, during which the contravention 
continues. 
28. -(1) On receipt of notice in writing from the Minister of 
Health that premises are in an insanitary condition, the owner 
thereof shall, within the period of time specified in the notice, proceed 
to connect the same with the sewage system and to carry out all 
such works as may be required in the notice. 
( 2) 
Any owner who contravenes subsection ( 1) shall be guilty 
of an offence and liable to a fine of 500 dollars or to imprisonment for 
a term not exceeding three months or both such fine and im-
prisonment. 


--- PAGE 13 ---

11 
29.-(1) All new premises within the area to which the 
sewerage system extends shall be connected to it. 
(2) 
On failure or neglect by the owner to connect his premises 
to the sewerage system, the Minister of Health shall notify the 
Corporation and thereupon the Corporation may enter into the 
premises at any reasonable hour and connect the same and the 
expense thereof shall become a debt due from and owing by the 
owner to the Corporation and a charge upon the premises and, in 
addition, the owner shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 
500 dollars or to imprisonment for a term of three months or both 
such fine and imprisonment. 
30.-(1) No person shall connect any sewer or storm water 
drain to the sewerage system without the consent in writing of the 
Corporation. 
(2) 
Any person who -
(a) contravenes subsection (l); 
(b) having contravened subsection (1) fails or neglects to 
disconnect the sewer or storm water drain from the 
sewerage system after receipt of a notice in writing 
from the Corporation so to do, 
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 500 dollars or to 
imprisonment for a term of three months or both such fine and 
imprisonment and, in the case of a contravention of paragraph (b) to 
a further daily penalty of 50 dollars for every day during which the 
offence continues after the date of receipt of the notice. 
New premises 
to be connected 
to 
sewerage 
system. 
No connections 
without 
con-
sent. 
31. -( 1) 
No person shall permit any matter which is injurious Tcade wast,. 
to the sewerage system or prejudicial to the disposal of sewage, or 
any steam or hot water at a temperature exceeding one hundred and 
fifty degrees fahrenheit to run into any street-sewer. 
(2) 
Any person who, after receipt of notice in writing from the 
Corporation, continues to act in contravention of subsection ( 1) shall 
be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 50 dollars in respect of 
every day during which the offence continues after receipt of the 
notice. 
(3) 
Where any person contravenes subsection (1) the Cor-
poration may enter into the premises concerned for the purpose of 
preventing the contravention. 
32. -( 1) 
No person shall deposit in any sanitary-fixture, house-
sewer or street-sewer any solid matter except human excreta. 
(2) 
Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty 
of an offence and liable to a fine of 500 dollars or to imprisonment for 
a term of three months or both such fine and imprisonment, and, in 
M\suse 
system. 


--- PAGE 14 ---

Design or house-
sewers. 
Installation 
of 
fixtures. 
Connections. 
Exemption 
from 
payment 
or duties. 
(No. 2 of 1975>. 
Third Schedule. 
12 
addition to the fine, to pay compensation for any damage or expense 
caused by the contravention. 
33. 
Every house-sewer shall be ventilated and shall, in ad-
dition to serving to remove faecal matter, be so constructed as to 
carry off any waste or other fluid house refuse (other than storm 
water) from any premises into the street-sewer. 
34. -( 1) 
No storm water shall be permitted to enter into any 
sewer from any premises, and every sanitary-fixture shall be ef-
fectively installed so as to be trapped, ventilated and aerated to the 
satisfaction of the Corporation for the purpose of preventing any 
ascent of air or gas from any sewer. 
(2) Every sink, gully, trap or other opening shall be so con-
structed or protected as to prevent any storm water from entering 
into any sewer. 
35. 
All pipe-laying and other works from the street-sewer to 
the property line for the purpose of connecting any premises to the 
sewerage system shall be effected by, or under the supervision of, the 
Corporation at the expense of the owner of the premises. 
PARTVII 
Miscellaneous 
36. 
The Corporation shall be exempt from the payment of-
(a) customs duties under the Tariff Act, 1975, in respect 
of the importation for its use of the items specified in 
the Third Schedule; 
<No. 23 of 1969> 
(b) any taxes under the Real Property Tax Act, 1969. 
Wilful damage 
37. -(1) Any person who wilfully injures or causes to be in-
Prosecutions. 
jured the water-supply system or the sewerage system in any rnanne< 
whatever shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 1,000 
dollars or to imprisonment for a term of six months or both such fine 
and imprisonment and to pay such sum as may be determined by the 
court as compensation to the Corporation for any expense incurred or 
likely to be incurred in repairing the injury. 
( 2) 
Any person who wilfully obstructs any officer or employee 
of the Corporation, the Minister or the Minister of Health while such 
officer, employee or Minister is carrying into effect the provisions of 
this Act shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine of 500 dollars 
or to imprisonment for a term of three months or both such fine and 
imprisonment. 
38. 
All offences under this Act shall be prosecuted summarily. 


--- PAGE 15 ---

J.3 
:J9. 
The Minister, after consultation with the Corporation, may Reguiahons 
make regulations for any or more of the following purposes -
(a) providing for the recognition and registration of 
existing private water-rights, for the grant and 
n,gistration of new private water-rights, for the 
limitations and rustrictions imposed upon holders of 
water-rights in relation to the extraction and use of 
water; 
(b) providing for the licensing of well-diggers, the terms 
and conditions of such licensing and the fees payable 
in respect of such licences; 
(c) requiring records to be kept concerning the extraction 
and use of water the quality and quantity of water 
used and discharged; 
(d) prescribing the minimum standards and specifications 
which shall be used in the design, construction, 
protection and maintenance of water and sewerage 
installations and apparatus, the conditions under 
which such installations or apparatus shall be worked 
or operated and the prohibition of the use of 
dangerous apparatus; 
(e) prescribing the manner in which water shall be 
measured and the standards of measurement which 
shall be employed and the manner in which water is 
permitted to be or is prohibited from being supplied or 
used; 
(fl prescribing the powers and duties of officers and 
employees of the Corporation; 
(g) prescribing the rate of charges to be made in respect of 
the water-supply and any fees payable in respect of 
any other service; 
(h) providing for the conveyance to the Corporation of all 
property transferred to it under section 16; 
(i) prescribing anything which is incidental or conducive 
to the carrying out by the Corporation of its functions 
under section 5 and to the exercise of its powers under 
section 6. 
40. 
Where offences are prescribed by regulations under section Penalties. 
39, the penalties therefor shall not exceed a fine of 500 dollars or 
imprisonment for 3 months. 
41. -(1) The Water and Sewerage Act is repealed. 
(2) 
Any rules made under section 35 of the Water and 
Sewerage Act (now repealed) and in force at the date of the coming 
Repeal 
saving 
Ch. 207. 
an 


--- PAGE 16 ---

Incorporation. 
Sul etc. 
of 
Corporation. 
Composition 
ard tenure o{ 
olfice. 
14 
into operation of this Act shall be deemed to be regulations made by 
the Minister under section 39 of this Act and until revoked and 
replaced by the Minister shall continue in force and shall be read and 
construed with such adaptations and modifications as are necessary 
to bring them into conformity with the provisions of this Act. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Section3) 
New Providence 
That part of the Island of Andros (together with the installations) 
used to supply water to New Providence .. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Section 4(2)) 
Provisions relating to the incorporation etc. of the Water and 
Sewerage Corporation. 
A Body Corporate 
I. 
The Corporation shall be -
(a) a body corporate with perpetual succession and a 
common seal, having capacity to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, movable and immovable, and to 
enter into contracts; and 
(b) capable of suing and of being sued and, subject to this 
Act, of doing and suffering all such acts as a body 
corporate may lawfully do and suffer. 
2.-(1) The common seal of the Corporation shall be in the 
custody of an officer of the Corporation designated by it and shall be 
affixed to instruments requiring the seal in the presence of the 
chairman or deputy chairman and one other member. 
(2) 
The common seal of the Corporation shall be authenticated 
by the signature of the chairman or deputy chairman and the other 
member, and such seal shall be officially and judicially noticed. 
(3) 
All documents, other than those required by law to be 
under seal, made by, and all decisions of, the Board may be signified 
under the hand of the chairman or deputy chairman. 
Chairman and Members. 
:J. -(1) The Board of the Corporation shall consist of: -
(a) the Minister, who shall be Chairman; 
(b) the Permanent Secretary to the Minister, who shall be 
deputy chairman; 


--- PAGE 17 ---

15 
(c) a representative of the Ministry of Finance; 
( d) not more than three other members appointed by the 
Minister and referred to in this Schedule as "ap-
pointed members". 
(2) 
Appointed members shall hold office for such period, not 
exceeding three years, as the Minister may direct, but shall be 
eligible for reappointment. 
4. -(1) Where membership of the Board is by virtue of an 
office and the holder of the office is absent or unable to act then the 
person acting in the office shall be a member of the Board for as long 
as he so acts. 
(2) 
Where an appointed member is absent or unable to act as a 
member of the Board, the Minister may appoint some other person to 
act temporarily in the place of the appointed member. 
Temporary 
Membership. 
5. 
The appointed members of the Board may, by letter ad- """'"'""~· 
dressed to the Minister and transmitted through the chairman resign 
membership of the Board. 
6. 
The Minister may by letter revoke the appointment of any Remo,al. 
appointed member of the Board if he thinks it expedient so to do. 
7. 
The appointment, removal, death or resignation of members Publication. 
of the Board shall be notified in the Gazette. 
8. 
The appointed members of the Board shall, unless employed Remomerafon. 
about the affairs of the Corporation otherwise than as a member 
thereof, receive such remuneration and allowances as may be 
determined by the Minister 'with the consent of the Minister of 
Finance. 
Proceedings 
9.-(1) The Board shall meet at such times as may be Meeting,. 
necessary or expedient for the transaction of business, and its 
meetings shall be held at such places and times and on such days as 
the Board may determine. 
(2) 
The chairman, or in his absence, the deputy chairman, shall 
preside at all meetings of the Board. 
(3) 
The chairman, or in his absence the deputy chairman and 
two other members of the Board shall form a quol1JJI1. 
( 4) 
The decisions of the Board shall be by a majority of votes 
and in addition to an original vote, in any case in which the voting is 
equal the chairman or deputy chairman presiding at the meeting 
shall have a casting vote. 


--- PAGE 18 ---

Power of &ard 
to invite per-
sons to attend 
meetings. 
General 
Manager. 
Appointment of 
Officers 
and 
servants. 
Provisional 
transfer 
of 
certain 
public 
officers 
to 
service of the 
Corporation. 
16 
(5) 
The validity of any proceeding of the Board shall not be 
affected by any vacancy among the members or by any defect in the 
appointment of a member. 
16} Subject to this Schedule, the Board may regulate its own 
proceedings. 
10.-(1} The Board may invite the General Manager and any 
person who, in the opinion of the Board, has expert knowledge 
concerning the functioning of the Corporation, which is likely to be of 
assistance to the Board to attend any meeting of the Board and to 
take part in the proceedings. 
I 2} 
Any person attending a meeting under this paragraph 
may, if invited, take part in any discussion at the meeting but shall 
not have any voting rights. 
Staff 
11.-(l} There shall be a General Manage, 4.f the Corporation 
who shall be appointed by the Board, with the prior approval in 
writing of the Minister. 
12} 
The General Manager shall be the chief executive of the 
Corporation and shall be responsible to the Board for -
(a} the day to day administration of the Corporation's 
affairs; and 
(b}I the provision of technical advice and guidance in 
matters of policy. 
(3) 
The General Manager may, with the prior approval of the 
Minister, be removed from office on the ground of misconduct, 
inefficiency or other good cause. 
14} 
Whenever the General Manager is absent from The 
Bahamas or is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his 
office, the Board may appoint a person to act as General Manager 
during such absence or inability. 
12. 
Save for the appointment of the General Manager which 
shall be made under paragraph 11, the Board shall appoint and 
employ, at such remuneration and on such terms and conditions as it 
thinks fit, a secretary and such other officers, servants and agents as 
it thinks necessary for the proper discharge of its functions. 
13.-(1} Any public officer employed in the Water and 
Sewerage Department of the Ministry of Works and Utilities may, 
upon the commencement of this Act, with his consent, be transferred 
from the public service to the service of the Corporation, for a period 
of twelve months from the date of such commencement. 


--- PAGE 19 ---

17 
(2) 
Where any public officer is transferred to the service of the 
Corporation under subparagraph ( 11, he shall not by reason of such 
transfer cease to be a public officer and the provisions of the 
Pensions Act shall continue to apply to him during the period of his a,_ "'-
transfer as if he were the holder of the office in the public service 
which he was holding immediately before the date of his transfer: 
Provided that no such officer shall be entitled to any salary or 
allowances as a public officer during the period of his transfer. 
(3) 
During the period of twelve months referred to in sub-
paragraph (1 ), every such officer shall be so employed by the Cor-
poration that his remuneration and conditions of service are not less 
favourable than those which are attached to the appointment held by 
such officer at the commencement of this Act. 
14. -( 1) 
Within the period of twelve months referred to in 
paragraph 13( 1 ), the Board shall determine in respect of each officer 
transferred to the service of the Corporation under that paragraph, 
whether or not the Board will offer permanent employment with tne 
Corporation to such officer, and shall forthwith give notice of its 
determination to each such officer. 
( 2) 
Every officer who accepts permanent employment with the 
Corporation offered to him under subparagraph ( I ) shall he deemed 
to have ceased to be in the public service on the date of such ac-
ceptance. 
(3) 
Every officer who -
(a) having been offered permanent employment with the 
Corporation under subparagraph (1) refuses to accept 
such employment; or 
(b) has not been offered permanent employment with the 
Corporation under the said subparagraph, 
shall at the expiration of the period of twelve months referred to in 
paragraph 13( I) be transferred from the service of the Corporation 
back to the public service. 
15. -(I) Where any public officer holding a pensionable office 
under the Government ceases to be the holder of such office by 
reason of his transfer with his consent to the service of the Cor-
poration and such person subsequently retires from the service of the 
Corporation in such circumstances that, had he remained a public 
officer, he would have been eligible for pension under the 
provisions of the Pensions Act, then in any such case the following 
provisions of this paragraph shall have effect. 
( 2) 
Any pension payable to any such person as is mentioned in 
subparagraph (1) by the Corporation to whose service he has been 
transferred .shall be calculated and granted to him in respect of his 
OH er 
and 
refusal 
of 
permanent 
employment in 
the 
Cor-
poration. 
Pension 
of 
persons 
trans-
ferred from the 
public 
service 
to 
the 
Cor-
pOtation. 
Qi. 319, 


--- PAGE 20 ---

0.. 319. 
Clt. 319. 
Public 
vants. 
Qi. 48. 
18 
total service under the Government and with the Corporation taken 
together and such service shall be reckoned as continuous for pension 
purposes. 
(3) 
There shall be payable out of the Consolidated Fund upon 
the warrant of the Minister of Finance to the Corporation as con· 
tribution to every pension paid in accordance with subparagraph (2), 
such amounts as would have been payable to the person concerned 
by way of pension under the Pensions Act, if such person had retired 
from the public service and if he had been granted a pension under 
the Pensions Act upon the date of his ceasing to be a public officer. 
,.,. 
16. -(1) Appointed memj,ers, the General Manager, officers 
and servants of the Corporation shall be deemed to be public officers, 
for the purposes of the Peri'al Code. 
°'· "· 
(2) 
The Public Authorities Protection Act shall apply to any 
action, suit, prosecution or other proceeding against the Corporation 
or against any member, officer or servant of the Corporation in 
respect of any act, neglect or default done or committed by him in 
such capacity. 
Pensioos et,. 
17. -( U The Corporation may, as regards any officers, ser-
vants or agents in whose case it may be determined by the Cor-
poration with the approval of the Minister of Finance to make 
provision for the payment on their death, injury or retirement of 
pensions, gratuities or other like benefits, pay or provide for the 
payment of such pensions, gratuities or other like benefits to them or 
to others by reference to their service as may be so determined. 
(2) 
Provision for pensions, gratuities or other like benefits 
under this Schedule may be made either by contributory or non-
contributory arrangements or partly by the one or by the other. 
THIRD SCHEDULE 
(Section 36) 
1. Plant machinery, tubes and pipes, pipe fittings and equipment 
of all kinds ( mechanical, electrical, electronic, hydraulic, 
pneumatic) including spares and accessories for the same. 
2. Petroleum products 
3. Chemicals 
4. Structural steel and accessories 
5. Building material 
6. Office and plant furnishings and equipment, and office supplies 
7. 
Instrumental and control equipment 
8. Vehicles 
9. 
Tools 
10. Safety equipment. 
