

--- PAGE 1 ---

\:ll~Ri'ei~ 
qi~~ ~cislf-tt6 
Government of the People· s Republic of Bangladesh 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs 
Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs Division 
NOTIFlCA TJON 
Dated the 06 o ember, 2013 
S.R.O.No.348-Law/2013--ln exerci e of the powers conferred by section 
46 of the Bangladesh Water Act, 2013. the Government is pleased to publq;h the 
folio"' ing English translation of the Act lo be called the Authentic English Text 
of the Act, and it shall be effective from the date on which the Act comes into 
force under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section I of the Act: 
BANGLADESH WATER ACT, 2013 
(ACT N0.14 OF 2013) 
An Act to make provisions for integrated development, management, 
abstraction, distribution, use. protection and conservation of water resources. 
WIIEREAS it is expedient and neces ary to make provi ions for the 
integrated development, management, abstraction, distribution, use, protection 
and conservation, of water resources; 
TIIEREFORE it is hereby enacted as follo\\s:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMI ARY 
1. Short title, commencement and application.-{ I) This Act may be 
called the Bangladesh Water Act, 2013. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

(2) This Act shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint. and different dates may be appointed 
for different sections of this Act. 
(3) This Act shall be applicable for such areas as the Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, specify and different areas may be specified 
for different sections of the Act. 
2. Definitions.-ln this Act, unless there i~ anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,-
( I) "appropriate authority" means any organization or authority, 
established or formed under any law or any instrument having the 
force of law, and involved in extracting water, distributing water, 
rendering service of water, or protecting or conserving any water 
resources; 
(2) 
"khal" means any passage of inflow and outflow of water; 
(3) 
"clearance certificate" means any certificate issued by the 
Executive Committee under section 16; 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
"water course" means flow of water from any water source; 
"water source" means any natural or manmade river, canal, beel, 
haor, baor, pond, lake, water-fall or any other similar watc!r source; 
"wetland" means any land where water remains at the level of 
surface or close to it and which inundates with shallow water from 
time to time, and where grows such plants that may usually grow 
and survive in marsh land; 
"National Water Policy" means any national water policy adopted 
as such by the Government from time to time; 
"National Water Resources Plan" means the water resources plan 
approved by the Council under section 15; 
"Executive Committee" means the committee constituted under 
section 9; 
( I 0) "control'' 
shall also include imposing ban, restrictions, and 
conditions; 
( 1 I) 
·'inspector" mean any officer or employee authorized as such 
under section 14; 
( 12) 
"Council"' means the National Water Resources Council constituted 
under section 4; 
( 13) 
"water" means any water mentioned in sub-section (I) of section 3; 


--- PAGE 3 ---

( 14) 
"water resources" means any surface waler, ground water and rain 
water, i.e. water in the atmosphere; and shall also include water of 
estuary, aquifer, flood-plain, wetland, water source, foreshore. 
coast, and any other similar reservoirs or places: 
( 15) 
·'Water Resource Development Project'' means any activity, 
program or initiative taken for the development of any water 
resources, such as: any hydraulic infrastructure for irrigation, flood 
control management and drainage, protection of river bank, 
dredging or any other similar activity, program or initiative; 
( 16) ''Water Resources Planning Organization'' means the Water 
Resources 
Planning 
Organization 
established 
under 
Water 
Resources Planning Act, 1992 (Act No. 12 of 1992); 
( 17) 
"Water Stress Area" means any area declared as such under section 17; 
( 18) 
"aquifer" means a layer lying in-between the saturated soil or rock 
layer beneath the ground surface which can store and transmit water 
and from where water can be pumped; 
(19) 
"compliance order" means any order issued under section 12; 
(20) 
·'foreshore·• means any part of land lying in-between the low water 
mark and high water mark during ordinary spring tide of a year, and 
in the case of river or sea port area as defined in Ports Act, i 908 
(Act No. XV of 1908), any part of land thereof which is 50 meters 
extended from the highest level of water to river bank, and in the 
case of areas other than river or sea port, any part of land thereof 
which is IO meters extended from the highest level of water; 
(21) "Code of Criminal Procedure" means the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898); 
(22) 
''baor" means any kind of ox-bow shaped lake where water course 
has become stagnant in course of time; 
(23) 
"embankment" means any dam, wall, dyke, protection dam or any 
other similar embankment made of earth or similar elements; 
(24) 
''beel" means any natural low land or round area which gets 
inundated by rain water or river water, and which remains 
inundated over the year or partially or entirely remains dry for a 
certain period of a year; 
(25) 
·'person" means any natural person, and shall also include any 
institution, company, association, partnership. firm or statutory 
institution or any other similar organization; 
(26) 
"ground water" means any water underneath the soil which flows 
through aquifers and is abstractable onto the surface by natural or 
artificial process: 


--- PAGE 4 ---

(27) 
''surface water" means any water on the surface of water source; 
(28) 
" land'. means any land as defined under section 2( 16) of the State 
Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 (EB Act No. XXVIII of 1950); 
(29) " Director General" means the Director General of Water Resources 
Planning Organization; 
(30) "estuary" means a water course which constantly and periodically 
flows from land towards sea and mixes with sea water, the extent of 
which is assessable; 
(3 1) 
"Government" means, for the purposes of this Act. the Ministry or 
Water Resources: 
(32) ·'conservation·• includes the increase in efficacy of, decrease in 
misuse of, and damage to, preservation and protection of, any water 
resources; 
(33) 
"protection" means imposition of ban and restrictions or conditions 
for the conservation of any water Resources; 
(34) 
"protection order" means any order issued under section 27; and 
(35) 
'·haor" means any saucer shaped large shallow depression created 
naturally in-between two separate rivers. 
3. Right to water and use thereof.-( I) Notwithstanding ,nyth ing 
contained contrary in any other law for the time being in force, all rights over the 
following water within the state territory shall, on behalf of the people, vest upon 
the State:-
(a) 
surface water; 
(b) 
ground water; 
( c) 
sea water; 
(d) 
rain water; and 
(c) 
water in the atmosphere. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of th is Act, right to potable water, and to water 
for hygiene and sanitation shall be treated as the highest priority right. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), all rights over 
the surface water on any private land shall remain with the owner of such land. 
and such rights to use the water shall, subject to the provisions of this Act. bt· 
continued to be enjoyed: 
Provided that the Executive Committee may, for preventing the wastagi.: 
and misuse of water, and for protection and conservation thereof, issue a 
protection order to the owner of such private land without discrimination. 


--- PAGE 5 ---

(4) Nothing of ub-scction ( I) shall prevent any person from using any 
water allowed earlier under any Act, rule or regulation. or any custom or ritual 
having the force of law, or any accord, license or permit that were in force prior 
to the commencement of this Act; and such use thereof shall remain 
uninterrupted until it is restricted or prohibited or controlled on or cancelled 
under this Act: 
Provided that, right to such use of water shall not be 1ransferable excepl the 
permission of the appropriate authority. 
(5) For the convenience of the use of water under sub-section (3), every 
individual shall have easement on any public or private land: 
Provided that, no owner of the land near to the bank of any waler source 
shall have any right to its bottom, and foreshore. 
CHAPTER II 
NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES COUNCIL AND 
ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS 
4. National Water Resources Council.--( I) For the purposes of 1his /\ct, 
there shall be a council to be called the 'National Water Resources Council', and 
the Government may, as soon as possible, after the commencement of this Act, 
by notification in the official Gazelle. constitute the Council comprising the 
fo llowing members, namely:-
(a) 
the Prime Minister, who shall also be the Chairperson of the 
Council; 
(b) 
Minister, Ministry of Finance; 
(c) 
Minister, Ministry of Agriculture; 
(d) 
Minister, Ministry of Planning; 
(c) 
Minister, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives; 
(t) 
Minister, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliament Affa irs; 
(g) 
Minister, Ministry of Land; 
(h) 
Minister, Min is try of Water Resources; 
(i) 
Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; 
(j) 
Minister, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock; 
(k) 
Minister, Ministry of Shipping & Inland Water Transport; 
{I) 
Mini ter, Ministry of Environment and Forest; 
(m) State Minister, Ministry of Water Resources (if any); 


--- PAGE 6 ---

~8~1;~ 
(n) 
(o) 
(p) 
(q) 
(r) 
(s) 
(t) 
(u) 
(\ ) 
(\\ ) 
(x) 
(y) 
(;,) 
(aa) 
(bb) 
(cc) 
(dd) 
(cc) 
(ff) 
(gg) 
(hh) 
Chairman, Standing Committee for the Ministry or Water 
Resource ; 
Cabinet ecrctary; 
Principal Secretary, Prime Minister·s Office; 
one member of Parliament from each of the administrative 
Di\ isions, to be nominated by the Prime Minister; 
cnior ccrctary or ecrctary. Ministry of Land; 
cnior ecrctary or ccretary. Economic Relation Division; 
enior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock; 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture; 
Senior ccretary or Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forest; 
cnior ecrctary or ccretary, Local Government Division: 
Senior Secretary or ecrctary. Ministry of Foreign Affairs: 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Legislative and Parliament Affairs 
Division: 
Member, Agriculture, Water Resources and Rural Development 
Division of Planning Commission; 
Director General, Bangladesh Water Development Board; 1 
Director General, Water Resoun:es Planning Organization; 
Member, Joint River Commission; 
President, Institute of Engineers, Bangladesh; 
Pre ident, Institute of Diploma Engineers, Bangladesh; 
three Water Resource Expert. to be nominated by the Prime 
Minister; 
one representative from Non-government Organizations (NGO), to 
be nominated by the Prime Minister; and 
enior ecrctary or Secretary. Ministry of Water Resources, who 
hall also be the Member-secretary of the Council. 
(2) 171c tenure o f the nominated members of the Council shall be 2 (two) 
years. but any nominated member may, at any time before the completion of such 
tenure, resign his po.st writing under his hand addressing to the Prime Minister, 
and the post shall fall vacant from the day of acceptance of the resignation lener 
by the Prime Minister. 
(3) The Government may, if necessary, by notification in the official 
Gazette, incrca c or decrease the number of Members of the Council. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

5. Functions of the Council.--For the purpose of Lhis /\ct and ubjcct to 
its provisions, the Council shall be the highc t deci ion making body, and in thi 
behalf, the Council hall have the following function . namely:-
(a) 
to make policies, and give in tructions for integrated de\ clopmcnl 
of, proper use of, afe abstraction of, proper di~tribution of. proper 
protection of, and proper con crvation of. \\atcr resources: 
(b) 
to give instructions in respect of making 
ational Water Resources 
Plan. for ensuring integrated development o f water Rc:)ourccs; 
(c) 
to approve the National Water Resources Plan, and cm,urc 
implementation thereof; and 
(d) 
to pcrfonn such other functions as may be determined by the Council. 
6. Meeting of the Council.-{ I) The Council hall, subject 10 the provision 
of sub-section (2), determine the working procedure of its own meeting. 
(2) The Member-secretary of the Counci l shall convene evc11 meeting of 
the Council at such venue and on uch time as ma) be determined by the 
Chairperson. 
(3) The meetings of the Council shall be pre ided over by the Chairper on 
or in his absence, the enior most member of the Council. 
(4) No act or proceeding of the Council 
hall be in alid or c,tllcd in 
question, merely on the ground of any vacancy in the oflicc of any member or 
any defect in the constitution of the Council. 
7. Exchange of international and regional Cooperation.-{ I) Subject to 
the provisions of this Act and of any other law for the time being in force. the 
Council may, for giving full efTect to the cooperation mentioned under ub-
section (2), give advice to the Gqvernment Lo enler inLo any memorandum of 
understanding, agreement, convention, treaty or any other similar instrument with 
any foreign country, government, or international or regional organi7..ation. 
(2) The Government may, in consultation with the Council, exchange any 
of the following cooperation with any foreign country, government, internal ional 
or regional organization, namely:-
(a) 
to exchange and assess any information and data in respect of 
common water resources; 
(b) 
to undertake joint 
urvey, study, and re earch on international 
rivers, and joint measures for preventing chemical and organic 
pollution thereof; 
(c) 
to take measures for the development of water resources, and for 
the abstraction and distribution of water of international river; or 
(d) 
to organize educational and training program on water resources. 


--- PAGE 8 ---

8. Power to adopt National Water Policy.--{ I) The Government may, 
from time to time. subject to the provision of sub-section (2), by notification in 
the official Gazelte, adopt a National Water Policy. 
(2) The Government may, in order to formulate National Water Policy 
mentioned in sub-section (I), make arrangement for public hearing in the manner 
prescribed by rules, to take opinions of the communities and organiwtions 
concerned with water resources, and shall, by taking due consideration of the 
opinions received in public hearing. finali7c the National Water Policy. 
(3) In the National Water Policy, the Government may include the policies 
of pricing of water to be determined by the appropriate authorities, and in doing 
so, the Government shall, along with other relevant issues, consider the following 
issues, namely:-
(a) 
purpose, and sectors of water use; 
(b) 
affordability of the water users; 
(c) 
actual cost of water abstraction and distribution; 
(d) 
financial ability and backwardness of water users or any group 
thereof; 
(e) 
demand and supply of water; and 
(f) 
any other issues considered relevant by the Government. i 
(4) Until a National Water Policy is adopted under sub-section (1), the 
National Water Policy, which was adopted by the Government immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall remain in force subject to being 
consistent with the provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTERm 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AND ITS DUTIES, 
RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS 
9. Executive Committee.-There shall be an Executive Committee of the 
Council for the efficient performance of its functions, and the Executive 
Committee shall consist of the fol lowing members, namely:-
(a) 
Minister, Ministry 
of Water Resources, who shall also be its 
Chairperson; 
(b) 
Minister, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives; 
(c) 
Minister, Ministry of Agriculture; 
(d) 
Minister, Ministry of Environment and Forest; 
(d Minister, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock; 


--- PAGE 9 ---

(f) 
Minister, Ministry of Land; 
(g) 
State Minister, Ministry of Water Resources (If any); 
(h) 
Member, Agriculture. Water Resources and Rural Development 
Division of Planning Commission; 
(i) 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture; 
U) 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Local Government Division; 
(k) 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Legislative and Parliament Affairs 
Division; 
(I) 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources; 
(m) Senior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock; 
(n) 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forest; 
(o) 
Senior Secretary or Secretary, Ministry of Land; 
(p) 
Director General, Directorate of Environment; 
(q) 
Director General, Bangladesh Water Development Board; 
(r) 
Chief Engineer, Local Government Engineering Department; 
(s) 
Chief Engineer, Department of Public Health Engineering; 
(t) 
Member, Joint River Commission; 
(u) two Water Resource Experts to be nominated by the Governrpcnt; 
(v) one representative from Non-government Organization (NGO), to 
be nominated by the Government; and 
(w) Director General, Water Resources Planning Organization, who 
shall also be its Member-secretary. 
10. Duties and responsibilities of the Executive Committce.-The 
Executive Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities, 
namely:-
(a) 
(b) 
to publish, circulate, monitor and evaluate the instructions issued, 
recommendations made, by the Council on water resources; 
to publicize, monitor and evaluate the National Water Policy and 
the National Water Resources Plan; 
(c) 
to take initiatives with regard to any planning, management of and 
inter-sector coordination on water resources; 
(d) 
to keep the Council periodically infonned with regard to the issues 
on water resource management, and give advice thereto; 
_(c) 
to coordinate among the appropriate authorities, to fonnulate 
policies regarding inter-sector disputes, and to resolve the disputes 
thereof and to issue instructions, if necessary; and 
(t) 
to perfonn such other duty as may be assigned to it by the Council. 


--- PAGE 10 ---

11. Meeting of the Executive Committee.--( I) The Executive Committee 
may, subject to the provisions of this section, determine the working procedure of 
its own meeting. 
(2) The Member-secretary of the Committee shall, with the consent of the 
Chairperson of the Committee, convene every meeting of the Committee, and the 
meeting shall be held at such venue and on such time as may be determined by 
the Chairperson. 
(3) The Chairperson of the Executive Committee shall preside over its meetings. 
(4) No act or proceeding of the Executive Committee shall be invalid or 
called in question, merely on the ground of any vacancy in the office of any 
member, or any defect in the constitution of the Committee. 
12. Power to issue compliance order.--( I) On the basis of the result of 
enquiry, scrutiny or sutvey, if it appears to the Executive Committee that any 
person or appropriate authority is not complying with, or is violating or attempts 
to violate any provision of sections 18, 19, 20, 21 , 22, 24 and 26. or of any 
clearance certificate, or of any prohibition or condition of any protection order, 
the Executive Committee or any officer authorized by it in this behalf, may, 
notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being 
in force, issue a compliance order to such person or appropriate authority, for 
complying with such provisions, or the prohibitions and conditions of the 
protection order, or the conditions of the clearance certificate within the time 
specified in the order. 
; 
(2) The Executive Committee or any officer authorized by it in this behalf 
shall, subject to the provisions of section 42, serve the compliance order issued 
under sub-section (I) in the manner prescribed by rules. 
(3) If any appropriate authority (not being an individual) does not comply, 
in confonnity with the compliance order, with any provision of this Act, or any 
prohibition and condition of the protection order, or any condition of the 
clearance certificate, the Executive Committee, instead of lodging any judicial 
process or imposing any compensation under section 29, may, notwithstanding 
anything contained contrary in any other provisions of this Act, call for the Head 
of such authority to explain the reasons of not complying with such provisions 
and conditions, and if such reason is not satisfactory, it may, identifying the 
person liable thereof, recommend the Council to take necessary action against 
such person. 
( 4) The compliance order shall, among other things, contain the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) 
full identity, with name and address, of the person violating the 
provisions or conditions; 
(b) 
reference of the provisions or conditions violated; 
(c) 
time-limits of compliance; and 
(d) 
any other necessary matters specified by the Executive Committee. 


--- PAGE 11 ---

(5) The compliance order shall also contain that, unless there is any reason, 
abidance of the compliance order is mandatory and non-compliance thereof is an 
offence punishable with impris.onment, and with compensation. 
(6) Before issuing a compliance order, the Executive Committee or any 
officer.authorized by it in this behalf shall giv(y the concerned person or authority 
a rcasonabJe opportunity of being heard irt the manner prescribed by rules, and 
I 
shall, at the time of taking decision, consider the views received during such 
hearing. 
(7) The issuance of the compliance order may, by general notification, be 
published and publicized in the electronic and print media in the manner 
prescribed by rules. 
13. Power to issue removal order.--(!) In violation of any provision of 
this Act or of any prohibition and condition of any protection order or of any 
clearance certificate, if any person or appropriate authority makes any 
construction or carries on land filling activities on water resources which creates 
impediments in the normal water course or changes the direction of such water 
course; the Executive Committee or any officer authorized by it in this behalf, 
notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being 
in force, may, to keep such water course natural, issue a removal order lOj such 
person or authority for removing the infrastructure, or land filling materials or 
elements thereof, within the time specified in such order. 
(2) The Executive Committee or any officer authorized by it in this behalf 
shall, subject to the provisions of section 42, serve the removal order under sub-
section (I) in the manner prescribed by rules. 
(3) Before issuing a removal order, the Executive Committee or any officer 
authorized by it in this behalf shall, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
rules, give the concerned person or authority a reasonable opportunity o f being 
heard, and shall, at the time of taking decision, consider the views received 
during such hearing. 
,. 
(4) Within the time specified in the removal order, if the infrastructure is 
not removed or land filling activities is not stopped without any reasonable 
ground, the Executive Committee or any officer authorized by it in this behalf, 
notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being 
in force, may, to keep the water course natural, remove, by serving a notice in 'the · 
manner prescribed by rules, such infrastructure or land filling materials from the 
water source, and may, subject to the provision of section 43, realize all the costs 
incurred for such removal of infrastructure or land filling materials from the 
person liable for making such infrastructure or carrying on land filling activities. 


--- PAGE 12 ---

(5) The removal order shall, among other things, contain the following 
matters, namcly:-
(a) 
full identity, with name and address, of the person making the 
infrastructure or carrying on land filling activities; 
(b) 
description of the illegal infrastructure or land filling activities: 
(c) 
time-limits of removal; and 
(d) 
any other matters to be specified by the Executive Committee. 
(6) Before taking measures for removal, the actual cost for such removal of 
the illegal construction or land fill ing materials hall be fixed after considering 
the views of the person liable for such illegal construction or land filling 
activities. 
(7) The issuance of the removal order may, by general notification, be 
published and publicized in the electronic and print media in the manner 
prescribed by rules. 
14. Secretarial support from the Director General and delegation of 
power to inspectors.--{ 1) For efficient functioning of the Executive Committee, 
the Director General shall provide all administrative and secretarial support to it. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Director General shall have the 
following duties, namely:-
. 
I 
(a) 
to implement and apply the policies and strategies adopted by the 
Council and the Executive Committee; 
(b) 
to prepare all kinds of proposals for placing before the meeting of 
the Council and the Executive Committee as per the directions 
thereof; 
(c) 
to pay visit to any site or project area for inspection; 
(d) 
to take necessary steps to build public awareness with regard to this 
Act; and 
(e) 
to perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the 
Council and the Executive Committee, from time to time. 
(3) For the purposes of this Act, the Director General may delegate any of 
his duties mentioned in clause (c) of sub-section (2) to any officer or employee of 
the Water Resources Planning Organization or of any other organization, and the 
officer or employee so authorized shall be called the inspector for the purpose of 
this Act. 
( 4) The inspector shall, with respect to any irregularity; defect or violation 
of any order found during inspection made under sub-section (3), submit a report 
thereof to the Director General or any officer authorized by him in this behalf. 


--- PAGE 13 ---

CHAPTER rv 
CONTROL ON WATER RESOURCE DEVELOPM E T AND MANACEME T 
15. Approval of National Water Resources Plan.-{ l) As 
oon as 
possible, after the commencement of chis AcL the Water Re ourccs Planning 
Organization shall. through the Executive Committee, place for approval before 
the Council a draft of the Naiional Water Resources Plan prepared in accordance 
with the Water Resource Planning Act, 1992 (Act No. XII of 1992). 
(2) In addition to the matters mentioned in the Water Resource Planning 
Act, 1992 (Act No. XII of 1992), the National Waler Resources Plan shall 
contain 1hc following matters. namely:-
(a) 
description of water re ources with present geographical location 
and mouza map; 
(b) analysis of economic, natural, social, political, environmental, and 
ecological and institutional clements, characteristics, and impact of 
water resources; 
(c) 
scientific analysis of all data and infonnation on water resources; 
(d) development of overall planning, infrastructure for abstraction, 
distribution, use, protection and conservation of water re ourccs. and 
fommlation of instructions thereof for sho,t, medium and long ter,n; 
(e) 
coordination with concerned Ministries, Divisions and organizations 
involved in the management of water resources; 
(f) 
present and future use of water resources; 
(g) 
integrated use of surface and ground water emphasizing the highest 
possible use of rain water; 
(h) assessment of availability of water; 
(i) 
determination of water quality standard; 
U) 
basin-wise development plan; and 
(k) 
fixation of priority of water use. 
(3) Before submitting a National Water Resources Plan to the Council for 
approval under sub-section ( 1 ), the Executive Committee shall. through inter-
ministerial discussion and exchange of views, make sure that such plan is 
appropriate and consistent with this Act, and with the National Water Policy. 
(4) The Executive Committee shall, after taking necessary mca urcs under 
sub-section (3), pre-publish a draft of the plan in the official Gazelle for eliciting 
public opinion, and shall also take necessary steps for extensive publicity thereof 
through digital, electronic and print media. 


--- PAGE 14 ---

(5) Any person may. within 90 (Ninety) days from the date of pre-
publication of the draft in the official GCJ2elle under sub-section (4), ubmit or 
end any remark or suggestion on the National Water Resources Plan to the 
Executive Comm inee or to any officer or organization authorized in this behalf 
by it, in writing or through digital or any other means. 
(6) The Executive Committee shall, upon analysis and consideration of the 
remarks and suggestions, if any. received under sub-section (5), recast the 
ational Water Resources Plan, and 
hall place it before the Council for 
approval. 
(7) The Council may, after having been satisfied with the rationales of the 
plan upo n disC\1ssion in its m·eeting, approve it or make necessary changes in it or 
direct the Executive Commil1ce to make necessary changes therein. 
(8) Upon approval by the Council, the Executive Commiucc shall publish 
the National Water Resources Plan in the official Gazelle. and upload a copy 
thereof in the website of the Ministry of Water Resources. 
(9) Until National Water Resources Plan is adopted under sub-section (7). 
the National Water Management Plan made by the Water Resources Planning 
Organization immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, subject to 
being consistent with this Act and with the National Water Policy, co~inue to 
have effect, mutatis mutandis. 
( I 0) The Executive Committee shall send a copy of the finalized National 
Water Resources Plan to all the organizations or appropriate authorities or local 
government 
institutions 
that 
are 
involved 
in 
undertaking, 
making 
o r 
implementing Water Resource Development Project, and request them to 
undertake or implement such project, in furtherance of this Act, and of the 
National Water Po licy, and to remain within the limits of the National Water 
Resources Plan. 
( I I) The request-letter 1,:iade under sub-section ( I 0) shall also contain 
among other contents that compliance with the provisions of this Act, or with the 
condition of a c learance certificate, or with the prohibition and condition of a 
protection order is mandatory, and · non-compliance thereof without any 
reasonable ground is an offence punishable with imprisonment, and with 
compensation. 
( 12) On finalization of the National Water Resources Plan under this Act, it 
shall create a binding obligation upon all the organizations or appropriate 
authorities or local government institutions to undertake, make or implement 
Water Resource Development Projects in accordance with the National Water 
Resources Plan. 


--- PAGE 15 ---

Explanation: In this section, "basin" means the region aero s which water 
course created out of rain, ice or snow, nows and falls into any water source. 
16. Issuance of clearance certificate on Water Resource Development 
Projects.--{ I) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for 
the time being in force, all organizations or'~ appropriate authorities or local 
government 
institutions 
that 
are 
involved 
in 
undertaking, 
making or 
implementing a Water Resource Development Project shall, for ensuring the 
consistency of such project with the National Water Re ourccs Plan, require to 
submit, in such manner and on such condition as may be prescribed by rules, an 
application to the Executive Committee, prior to initiating such project. 
(2) After receiving an application under sub-section ( 1 ), the Executive 
Committee shall, examining the application and relevant project documents, 
make sure as to the consistency of the project with the National Water Re ources 
Plan, and shall, after granting the application, issue a clearance certificate in such 
manner and on such condition as may be prescribed by rules, or if the application 
is rejected, shall inform the reason thereof. 
(3) If any organization or appropriate authority or local government 
institution, that is involved in undertaking, making or implementing any Water 
Resource Development Project, violates any condition of the clearance certificate 
or of any provision of this Act; the Executive Committee may, after havin
1g been 
sure about such violation by making necessary enquiry and by giving the 
concerned person a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the manner 
prescribed by rules, withdraw the clearance certificate issued in favor of such 
project, and may publish and publicize the fact of such withdrawal widely in the 
print and electronic media. 
CHAPTERV 
CONTROL ON WATER USE AND PROTECTION AND 
CONSERVATION OF WATER RESOURCES 
17. Declaration of Water Stress Arca and management thereof.--() ) To 
protect any water source or any aquifer, the Government may, on the 
recommendation of the Executive Committee made upon the results of necessary 
enquiry or scrutiny or survey, declare, by notification in the official Gazette, any 
area or any part thereof or any land connected thereto with such water resources 
as Water Stress Area for a period specified therein. 
(2) In the notification issued under sub-section ( 1 ), the boundary of the 
Water Stress Area shall be specified by referring the mouza map and plot 
numbers thereof. 


--- PAGE 16 ---

(3) For efficient management of the Water 
tress Area. the Executive 
Committee may. ubjcct to the provision of this Act, impose restriction by 
i suing a protection order. 
18. Preferential use of water in the Water tress Arca and exemption 
thereof.-{ I) 
otwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for 
the lime being in force, abstraction and u c of water from any Water Stress Arca 
shall, subject to the availability of water therein, be made in accordance with the 
following order for the national interest and the interest of the local communities, 
namely:-
(a) 
use of water as potable; 
(b) 
use of water in hou. ehold; 
(e) 
use of water in agriculture; 
(d) 
u e of water in aquaculture; 
(e) 
use of water for balancing eco-system; 
(f) 
use of ""ater for wild life; 
(g) 
use of water for natural river now; 
(h) 
use of water in industry; 
(i) 
use of water for salinity control; 
(j) 
use of water for power generation; 
(k) 
use of water for amusement; and 
(I) 
use of water for other purposes. 
(2) Depending on the socio-economic condition, and on the opinion of the 
general people. the Executive Committee may, by a notification in the official 
Gazelle. change the order made in sub-section (I). 
(3) For the purposes of this section, availability of water in the Water Stress 
Arca shall, by issuing a public notice in digital. print and electronic media, be 
widely published and publicized among the general people in the manner 
prescribed by rules. 
19. Fixing the lowest safe yield level of aquifer and restrictions on 
abstracting ground water.-{ I) Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in 
any other law for the time being in force, the Executive Committee, on the basis 
of the results of necessary enquiry, scrutiny or survey, may, by notification in the 
official Gazelle, fix the lowest safe yield level of any aquifer of any area. 
(2) The boundary of the area, to which lowest safe yield level applies. shall 
be specified in the notification issued under sub-section (I) by referring the 
mouza map and plot numbers thereof. 


--- PAGE 17 ---

(3) Any person or appropriate authority may, subject to the lowe t afe 
yield level, and the provisions of this Act or any other la\ for the time being in 
, 
force, sink shallow or deep tube-well, in the manner pre cribed b)' rules, into the 
ground for abstracting ground water. 
(4) To ensure safe abstraction of water from aquifers, the Execu1ive 
Committee may, subject to the provisions of this Act, impose re trictions by 
issuing a protection order. 
Explanation: In this section " afe yield level"' means the amount of 
abstraction of water that keeps the aquifer afe and protective. 
20. Ensuring normal now of water course.-{ I) No person or 
organiza1ion shall. without the permission of appropriate authority, stop natural 
now of any \\ater course or create obstacles to uch no\! or divert or anempt to 
divert the direction of any water course by constructing any structure, whether it 
is on the bank or not, of any water source, or by filling any water source or by 
extracting sand or mud from any water source: 
Provided that for the interest of the development of a water source or of the 
prevention of erosion of bank thereof, any kind of structure on such water source 
may be constructed, or any water source may be fully or partly filled, on the basis 
of the result of necessary survey and with the permission of appr.opriate 
authority: 
1 
Provided further that, without prejudice to the generality of section 21 , any 
flood control embankment may, with the permission of the appropriate authority, 
be built in a water source to save the people and their properties from natural 
11ood. 
(2) For keeping now of water course nom1al, the Executive Committee 
may, subject to the provisions of this Act, impose any restriction by issuing a 
protection order. 
21. Protection of flood control embankment.-{ I) To ensure the 
su tainability of the flood control embankment, no person shall, without the 
permission of the appropriate authority, be allowed to construct any house, 
establishment or any other structure on, or on the slope of such embankment. 
(2) 
otwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1 ), to make the 
nood control embankment strong and to materialize the tree plantation program 
of the government, suitable trees may, subject to the existing guidelines. be 
planted alongside the embankment in a well organized and planned manner. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1 ), a nood control 
embankment may, with the permission of appropriate authority, be used as a 
street or road for the be t use of land thereof. 


--- PAGE 18 ---

( 4) In violation of the provision of sub-section (I), if any person, without 
the pennission of appropriate authority, constructs any house, establishment or 
other structure on flood control embankment, the Executive Committee may, 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
issue a removal order in the manner prescribed by rules. 
(5) To ensure the sustainability of the flood control embankment, the 
Executive Committee may, subject to the provisions of this Act, impose any 
restrictions by issuing a protection order. 
22. Conservation of water source and management thereof.-( I) 
Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being 
in force, if it appears to the Executive Committee from the results of any enquiry, 
scrutiny or survey:-
(a) 
that it is an urgent necessity to conserve the water of a dighi, pond, 
or any other similar water source as a source of potable water due 
to severe scarcity of such potable water for any natural or other 
reason; or 
(b) 
that it is an urgent necessity to conserve a haor, baor or any other 
similar water source for seasonal birds to stay or to move safely and 
to keep their sanctuary safe; 
. 
the Executive Committee may, by demarcating the boundary of ihe water 
source, issue a protection order to the owner or appropriate authority for the 
conservation of such water source as a source of potable water. 
(2) In the order issued under sub-section (I), the bouncfary of the water 
source shall be specified by referring the mouza map and plot numbers thereof. 
(3) The Executive Committee may, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
impose any restriction by issuing a protection order for ensuring the proper 
management of the water source. 
23. Water zone demarcation and management thereof.--(1) Depending 
upon the results of necessary enquiry, 
the Executive Committee may, in 
consultation and coordination with 
relevant Ministries, 
Divisions, and 
organizations, demarcate, by notification in the official Gazette, any area into the 
following water zones, namely:-
(a) industrial water zone; 
(b) agricultural water zone; 
(c) brackish water aquaculture zone; and 
( d) hatchery water zone. 


--- PAGE 19 ---

(2) The Executive Committee may, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
impose restrictions by issuing a protection order for ensuring efficient 
management of the water zones mentioned in sub-section (I). 
24. Restrictions on water storing.-( I) No person shall, without the 
permission of the appropriate authority, and complying with the provisions of 
this Act, store water of any water source in any natural or artificial reservoir. 
(2) The Executive Committee may. subject to the provisions of this Act, 
impose restrictions by issuing a protection order to control the activities of 
storing water. 
25. Declaration of flood control zone and management thereof.-( 1) 
Depending upon the results of necessary enquiry or survey, the Executive 
Committee, for the interest of the people, may, by a notification in the official 
Gazette, declare any wetland as flood control zone to ensure easy passage of the 
flow of flood water. 
(2) ln the notification issued under sub-section (I}, the boundary of the 
flood control zone shall be specified by referring the mouza map and plot number 
thereof. 
I 
(3) For the protection of flood control zones declared under sub-section (I), 
the Executive Committee may, by rules in general cases or by order in special 
cases, impose prohibition or condition on any activity that obstructs or diverts the 
flow of flood water through such zones. 
26. Restriction on abstraction of total water from any water source.-
Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being 
in force, no water of any water source shall be allowed to exhaust completely by 
abstraction: 
Provided that the provision of this section shall not apply to abstraction of 
water from any private owned water source, subject to the provisions of this Act. 
27. Power to issue protection order and impose restrictions by it.~ 1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained contrary in any other law for the time being 
in force, the Executive Committee may, in the manner prescribed by rules, issue 
and promulgate protection order, subject to the provision of section 42. 
(2) Before issuing a protection order, the opinion of the local people of the 
concerned area requires to be taken into account by giving them an opportunity 
of being heard in the manner prescribed by rules. 


--- PAGE 20 ---

(3) The protection order shall. among other contents. also contain that. 
without reasonable ground, compliance of the protection order is mandatory. and 
non-compliance thereof is an offence punishable with imprisonment, and with 
compensation. 
(4) For the purposes of this section, the fact of the issuance of the protection 
order shall, by a public notice, be published and publicized widely for general 
people through digital, electronic and print media in the manner prescribed by 
rules. 
28. Water pollution control.-
ln the case of the prevention of water 
pollution, the Bangladesh Environment Con ervation Act, 1995 (Act No. I of 
1995) shall apply. 
Explanation: In this section, "water pollution" means direct or indirect 
harmful -changes of physical, chemical and organic properties of water. 
CHAPTER V1 
OFFENCE, PUNISHMENT AND TRJAL 
29. Punishment, fine and compensation for violating compliance order 
and protection order.-( I) Whoever willingly violates or ignores any 
compliance order or protection order issued under this Act, shall, subject to the 
provision of sub-section (2), be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to 5 (five) years or with fine which may extend to 
Taka IO (ten) thousand or with both. 
(2) If any person willingly violates or ignores a compliance order or 
protection order for the first time, the Executive Committee or any officer 
authorized by it in this behalf may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section ( I). exonerate the offender from the charges of first offence by imposing 
compensation on such ground or limit, and in such manner as may be prescribed 
by rules, and the second or subsequent violation thereof shall be deemed to be an 
offence under sub-section (I). 
(3) Prior to impose compensation under sub-section (2), the Executive 
Committee or any officer authorized by it in this behalf shall give the concem 
person a reasonable opportunity of being heard by giving notice in the manner 
prescribed by rules. 
Explanation: In this section "compensation" shall not include the line 
imposed by any court. 


--- PAGE 21 ---

30. Punishment of obstructions.-{ I) Whoever willingly obstructs an} 
officer or cmplo}ec while discharging hi 
duty under this Act, or willingly 
ignores or denie to give such officer or employee a reasonable opportunity of 
inspection in any institution, premises or project area. shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either de cription for a term which may extend to 5 (fh c) years 
or with a fine which may extend 10 Taka JO (ten) thousand or with both. 
(2) Whoever willingly fails or denies to present an} regi ter, file, or 
document to any officer di charging his duty under ub-scction (I). or obstructS 
any per on from appearing before or from giving depositions before such officer 
on duty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to 3 (three) years or with fine which may extend to Taka 
2 (nvo) thousand or with both. 
Explanation: In this section "obstruct" shall also include giving a threat. 
31. Punishment for giving false information.-
Whocver intentionally and 
knov. ingly gives any false or distorted information or conceals any information, 
hall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to 1 (one) year or with fine which may extend to Taka 3 (three) thou and 
or with both. 
32. Trial of offence, cognizability, etc.-{ 1) 
otv. ith tanding an} thing 
contained contrary in any other law for the time being in force, the off dnces 
punishable under this Act shall be triable by the Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class or Merropolitan Magistrate. 
(2) The offences punishable under this Act shall be bailable and 
non-cognizable. 
(3) The offences puni hable under this Act shall be triable in accordance 
with summary trail process. 
33. Application of the Code of Criminal Proccdure.--Subjcct to the 
provi ions of this Act, the Code of Criminal Procedure shall be applicable for the 
investigation, trial. appeal and other relevant matters of any offences punishable 
under this Act. 
34. Commission of offence by company or institution.-lf an offence is 
committed under this Act, or any provision thereof is contravened by any 
company or institution, every director, executive, manager, secretary or any other 
officer or employee or representative of such company or institution involved 
with such offence or contravention shall be d~emcd to have committed such 
offence or made such contravention, unless l,e proves that such offence was 
committed or contravention was made beyond his knowledge or he tried hi level 
best to prevent the commission of such offence or contravention. 


--- PAGE 22 ---

Explanation: In this section-
(a) 
·'company or institution·· shall include, whether incorporated or not. 
registered or nol. any company, corporation. institution, partner hip 
bu incc;s, a sociation. body of persons or organization ; and 
(bl 
'·director'' shall include partner or any member of the board of 
directors. 
35. Abetment of offence.-
Whoever abates, or excites or instigates or 
provides assistance in committing an offence punishable under this Act shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the same offence like the ofTender. and hall be liable to 
the offence liJ..e the off ender. 
36. To take cognizance of offence.-No court shall take cogni.t.ance of any 
offence puni hablc 
under this Act without a written complaint made by the 
Director General or any officer authoriLed by him in this behalf. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
37. Power to exempt the price of water.-Notwithstanding anything 
contained contrary in any other law for the time being in force, the Government 
may, in consultation with the appropriate authority, for the national and local 
interest, without di crimination, exempt, by notification in the omcial Gazette, 
any etas of person or community, for a particular time or area. from pa)fing the 
price of water used in household or normal agriculture. 
38. Use of information technology.--Subject to the provisions of 
Information and Communication Technology Act, 2006 (Act No. 39 of 2006), 
the infonnation technology as defined therein ma). in addition to the procedure 
laid down in this Act, be used in respect of anything to be done or power to be 
exercised or duty to be discharged thereunder. 
39. Delegation of power.-
The Council may, by general or pecial order, 
delegate any of its power or function, if necessary and subject to the conditions 
fixed by ii. to the Executive Committee or the Chairperson of the Executive 
Committee or the Director General or an inspector or to any other omcer. 
40. Power of entry, calling for records, interrogation, etc.--For the 
purposes of this Act, the Council, or the Executive Committee or any officer or 
inspector authorized in this behalf either by general or special order may exercise 
any one of tht: following po\.\-ers, namely:-
(a) 
to enter into any public or private land or project area, and to 
interrogate any person, or call for or scrutini/£ any record or any 
infom1ation; 
(b) 
to inspect such land or area or anything on the land or area: and 
(c) 
to inquire into or take sample of anything. or to conduct any survey 
on uch land or area. 


--- PAGE 23 ---

41. Obligation to render cooperation to Water Resources Planning 
Organization.-
Water 
Re ources Planning Organi/ation or any per-,on 
authori:;,ed b) it in thi behalf may make a rcquc l to an) public or private 
organization or statutory body or to any officer or employee thereof for rendering 
,Ill) cooperation in the performance of an) function, or cxcrci'iing an) po"er 
under this Act, and the officer or employee of . uch organi/.ation or body shall, if 
so reque ted. render such cooperation. 
42. Service of order.-
lf any notice or order i sued under this /\ct requires 
to be served upon any person, it shall be deemed to be proper!) scr ed on such 
person, if:-
(a) 
it is received by such per on personally or by his agent; 
(b) 
it is sent by registered po t to the last known abode or business 
address in Bangladesh of such person; 
(c) 
it i sent through or uploaded in electronic media; and 
(d) 
it is publi hcd and publici/ed in widely circulated national dailies. 
43. Mode of realizing money.--( I) If any compensation or any other 
money become. due from any person under this Act, the Executive Committee 
may, subject to the provision of sub-section (2), realiLe uch mone) in the 
manner prescribed b) rule . 
1 
(2) For the purpose of realizing any money due under this Act from any 
person, the Executive Committee may. notwithstanding an) thing contained 
cOMtrary ,fo any other law for the time being in force, mal,.c a request to any 
scheduled bank to freeze the bani,. account of uch person. 
44. Right to information.--Subject to the provisions of the Right to 
Information /\ct. 2009 (/\ct 
o. 20 of 2009). ever) person hall be entitled to 
have such infonnation as defined therein. ,., ith respect to anything done or any 
power exercised or any duty discharged or any action taken or any order passed 
by the Council or Executive Committee or by any officer so authori/ed under 
this Act. 
45. Power to make r ulcs.-
The Government ma) . by notification in the 
official Gazette. make rule to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
46. Publication of English Authentic Text.--( I) After the commencement 
of this Act, the Government may, by notification in the official Ga=e/le, publish 
an Authentic English Text of this /\ct. 
(2) In the event of any conflict between the Bangla text and the Engli h 
text, the Bangla text shall prevail. 


--- PAGE 24 ---

47. Repeal and savings.-{ I) As soon as the National Water Resources 
Council and the Executive Committee arc constituted under sections 4 and 9 
respectively, all the notifications issued earlier relating to the formation of the 
National Water Resources Council and the Executive Committee shall be 
repealed, and the National Water Resources Council and the Executive 
Committee constituted by such notifications shall be dissolved. 
(2) Notwithstanding such dissolution under sub-section (I), anything done 
or any action taken by such dissolved National Water Resources Council or, as 
the case may be, by such Executive Committee shall be deemed to have been 
done and taken under this Act, and shall, subject to being consistent with this 
Act, continue to be in force. 
By order of the President 
Mohammad Shahidul Haque 
Secretary. 
Clll:~~ (~). ~"1"1M61'14, ~~ 
~~. 
~- ~~~ 
1 
~ 
m-tlf (~9PIITT), ~"1rnW1<f.i, ~"i'1WM lP1f1T '<3 -$fil"RT~, 
~
. ~~~
, www.bgpress.gov.bd 
