REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT

LAW NO. 1/02 OF 26 MARCH 2012 ESTABLISHING THE WATER CODE IN BURUNDI

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC,

Having regard to the Constitution of the Republic of Burundi;

Having regard to Law No. 1/02 of 25 March 1985 establishing the Forestry Code of the Republic of Burundi;

Having regard to Law No. 1/010 of 30 June 2000 establishing the Environmental Code of the Republic of Burundi;

Having regard to Law No. 1/014 of 11 August 2000 on the liberalization and Regulation of the Public Service for drinking water and electrical energy;

Having regard to Law No. 1/08 of 17 March 2005 establishing the Code of Judicial Organization and Competence;

Having regard to Law No. 1/05 of 22 April 2009 on the Revision of the Penal Code of Burundi;

Having regard to Law No. 1/02 of 25 January 2010 on the revision of Law No. 1/016 of 20 April 2005 on the Organization of Communal Administration;

Having regard to Law No. 1/11 of 16 May 2010 establishing the Code of Navigation and lake transport;

Having regard to Law No. 1/10 of 30 May 2011 on the Creation and Management of protected areas in Burundi;

Having regard to Law No. 1/13 of 9 August 2011 on the Revision of the Land Code of Burundi;

Having regard to Decree-Law No. 1/16 of 17 May 1982 establishing the Health Code;

(Page 2)

Having regard to Decree-Law No. 1/6 of 3 March 1980 on the Creation of national parks and nature reserves;

Having reviewed Decree-Law No. 1/41 of 26 November 1992 on the Institution and Organization of the Public Water Domain;

The Council of Ministers having deliberated;

The National Assembly and the Senate having adopted;

PROMULGATES:

TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I: SCOPE OF APPLICATION AND FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES

Section 1: Scope of application

Article 1:
This Code establishes the fundamental rules and the institutional framework intended to ensure the rational and sustainable management of water resources and public interest hydraulic works and facilities, so as to permit:

a. the conservation and protection of this resource against all forms of degradation and nuisance, without prejudice to the provisions established by environmental legislation.

b. its rational use and exploitation according to the different needs and priorities of the State, local authorities, natural or legal persons carrying out activities in the territory of Burundi, as well as any other person residing therein.

Section 2: Principles

Article 2:
The management and use of water are primarily based on the following principles:

(Page 3)

1. Principle of recognition of the economic value of water

Water is an economic good.

The development of water resources contributes significantly to poverty reduction and to the socio-economic development of the country. The recognition of the economic value of water is reflected in the application of the "User-Payer Principle".

2. Principle of subsidiarity

The State shall transfer a portion of its powers, particularly in matters of drinking water supply, to decentralized structures such as local authorities. These authorities shall define the broad orientations of the public drinking water service with the assistance of deconcentrated technical services. They shall make decisions relating to the development of the service, the investments to be made, and the mode of operation of the infrastructure.

The structures to which the State transfers its powers may call upon private operators for the execution of certain activities. The interventions of the latter may also take place in the mobilization of financing and in the operation of drinking water infrastructure through appropriate contracts. For its part, the State shall create the enabling framework conditions for private sector interventions.

3. Principle of women's participation in decision-making

Women shall participate in decision-making at all levels and must be involved in water resources protection and development activities and in the management of hydraulic and sanitation infrastructure.

4. Principle of solidarity

The population is at the center of all actions to be undertaken in the management and use of water resources.

Measures must be taken to allow the poor and other vulnerable groups to have access to water and sanitation services at an affordable price. These measures include, in particular, the distribution of recurrent water service charges on the tariff through a system of solidarity between the different segments of the population according to their financial capacity.

(Page 4)

5. Principle of regional and international cooperation in water resources management

The use that countries make of shared waters may have impacts on their availability and on their development upstream and downstream. Consequently, regional and international cooperation is essential for the sustainable development of shared basins.

6. Principle of good governance in the water sector

In the interest of ensuring good management of the water sector that aims for equity, efficiency, and sustainability of the resource, institutions shall work in a transparent manner and have the duty to be accountable. The functions of regulation are separate from those of control and from those of service provision and water use. A clear clarification of the roles of the different institutions is made to avoid potential overlaps or dilutions of responsibilities.

The institutions in charge of regulation and those that ensure the provision of water services shall enjoy broad autonomy in their functioning.

7. Principle of sustainability of water services

Appropriate measures must be taken at all levels to ensure efficient management of resources and infrastructure and to reduce the costs of water services. In this context, the planning of investments and the implementation of water projects must take into account the demands made by the beneficiaries.

In urban areas, the supply of drinking water shall be billed at the full tariff to allow for the progressive full recovery of the operating and maintenance costs of the infrastructure as well as the constitution of capital.

In rural areas, the tariff must cover at least the operating and maintenance costs of the infrastructure.

(Page 5)

8. Principle of stakeholder participation in the water sector

In accordance with this principle, the development and management of water must be based on a participatory approach, integrating users, planners, and political decision-makers at all levels.

9. Principle of a programmatic approach

The planning, financing, and implementation of investments in the drinking water sector must evolve towards the application of a programmatic approach. This approach emphasizes the development of a sector in its entirety.

The programmatic approach reinforces transparency in the expenditure circuit and may allow for an increase in sector financing. It allows for the harmonization of procedures and a better measurement of the impact of the investments made.

10. Principle of responsibility

The principle of responsibility aims to prevent waste and activities potentially harmful to water resources. Even in cases of doubt, measures aimed at preventing a risk of serious and irreversible damage to the integrity of water resources must be adopted. This principle also aims, in the event of damage caused to the environment, to put in place mechanisms for repairing this damage, either through compensation to the victims or through measures of reparation in kind.

Within a hydrographic basin, the different uses of water are considered together, and each use takes into account its effects on the others.

Responsibility imposes on users and public authorities a certain number of duties towards the resource. It is reflected in particular by the application of the "Polluter-Payer Principle."

Article 3:
The public authorities shall take the necessary provisions and measures to strengthen the capacity of populations, user groups and particularly women, private associations, and local authorities, in order to enable them to assume increased responsibilities within the framework of participatory management, aimed at appropriate protection and responsible use of water resources.

(Page 6)

Participatory management must favor procedures and mechanisms that allow the aforementioned different actors to take part, directly or through consultation, in the implementation of strategies likely to promote sustainable management and a balanced use of water resources.

CHAPTER II: DEFINITIONS AND BASIC CONCEPTS

Article 4:
Without prejudice to the definitions already established by the Environmental Code of Burundi concerning environmental protection in general, the main concepts used in this Code shall be understood in the sense given below:

1. administration:
all central administration services, agencies, personalized administrations, public establishments, and local authorities participating in the management and use of water;

2. agency:
national service for the control and regulation of water resources management;

3. drinking water supply:
production by catchment, drilling, wells, treatment and storage, transport, and distribution of drinking water for public use;

4. hydraulic development:
organization of water resources in a given area according to the socio-economic activities of the population;

5. sanitation:
the action of collecting, evacuating, rejecting, or destroying liquid or solid waste, stormwater, and any other substance harmful to health;

6. users' association:
a group of people from a locality organized for the use of the public water service;

(Page 7)

7. aquifer:
a single or multiple underground layer of rocks with sufficient porosity and permeability to permit either a significant flow of groundwater or the catchment of significant quantities of groundwater;

8. authorization:
a unilateral act by which the administration permits a promoter, for a specified duration and under conditions provided for by said authorization, to establish and operate installations, works, and other activities related to water for the satisfaction of specific needs;

9. hydrographic basin or watershed:
a geographical area in which all runoff flows through a network of watercourses and, possibly, water bodies towards a point of convergence called an outlet;

10. pipeline:
a conduit intended for the transport of drinking water or wastewater;

11. catchment:
the withdrawal of water for a determined use, or a surface water intake structure or a groundwater extraction device;

12. public service concession:
a mode of service management whereby a public authority, the grantor, entrusts a private party, an individual or more often a company, the concessionaire, by means of a convention with the latter, the task of carrying out at its own expense the necessary investments for the creation of the service and of operating it at its own risk, being remunerated by means of fees collected from users;

13. declaration:
an act by which any person informs the competent administration of the installations, works, and other activities related to water that they plan to carry out;

14. delegation:
an action by which the State entrusts by contract to any natural or legal person of public or private law the management of all or part of the public water service;

(Page 8)

15. dike:
a structure intended to contain waters, to protect from their effects, or to guide their course;

16. public water domain:
the set of water resources, developments, and hydraulic works whose management falls exclusively under the sovereignty of the State and which are not susceptible to private appropriation;

17. water:
bodies of water that constitute surface waters and groundwaters as well as water as an element of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems;

18. shared water:
water that separates or crosses two or more countries;

19. surface water:
all waters that flow or are stagnant on the land surface;

20. water for consumption:
water intended for drinking and domestic uses, for the manufacture of carbonated beverages, mineral waters, and ice, for the preparation and preservation of any foodstuff and merchandise intended for consumption;

21. inland waters:
waters consisting of stagnant waters and flowing waters at the surface of the ground as well as groundwaters landward of the baseline used to measure the breadth of territorial waters;

22. meteoric water:
any water originating more or less directly from precipitation or condensation of atmospheric water vapor;

23. mineral water:
groundwater containing mineral salts;

(Page 9)

24. polluted water:
water that has undergone, as a result of direct or indirect human activities, or under the action of a process, whether biological or geological, a degradation of its state which has the consequence of rendering it unfit for the use for which it is intended;

25. drinking water:
water intended for human consumption that meets, in its natural or treated state, standards defined by the regulations in force on water quality;

26. groundwater:
water found below the surface of the ground in the saturation zone and in direct contact with the soil or subsoil;

27. surface waters:
inland waters with the exception of groundwater, transitional waters, and coastal waters;

28. transboundary waters:
surface and groundwaters shared between two or more countries;

29. wastewater:
waters whose natural characteristics have been modified by domestic, artisanal, industrial, agricultural use, or any similar waters, which, due to such uses, may cause pollution if they are discharged into the aquatic environment without prior treatment;

30. lock:
a structure built between two bodies of water of different levels to allow boats to pass from one to the other through the maneuvering of mobile elements such as gates and valves;

(Page 10)

31. environmental impact assessment:
the set of procedures used to evaluate the negative or positive effects of a project or an activity on the environment before its implementation and to propose any measure or action aimed at eliminating, reducing, or mitigating the harmful effects on the environment likely to be caused by such an activity;

32. operator:
a natural or legal person, public or private, responsible for the implementation or management and maintenance of a water installation;

33. upstream land:
a space or domain located upstream of a watercourse;

34. borehole:
a small-diameter circular hole drilled from the ground surface down to an aquifer layer and equipped with a mechanical or electromechanical pumping system;

35. septic tank:
a structure intended for the collection and liquefaction of excremental matter and equipped with a purification device;

36. integrated water resources management (IWRM):
a process that promotes the coordinated development and management of water, land, and related resources in order to maximize economic and social well-being in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of ecosystems;

37. rational management of water resources:
the set of measures to be taken in order to ensure a permanent quantitative and qualitative inventory of water resources, with a view to effective planning, protection, development, and optimal use of these resources, taking into account the various needs, whether food, social, economic, cultural, sporting, or other; at the level of the State, of all its components, as well as any other user;

(Page 11)

38. water installation:
the set of installations and infrastructures intended to supply drinking water or collective sanitation services, to evacuate domestic wastewater in order to meet the needs of the public in a given geographical area; installation for catchment, withdrawal, and treatment of water assimilated to water production, installations for transport, distribution, and connection for drinking water;

39. body of groundwater:
a distinct and significant volume of groundwater within one or more aquifers;

40. water table:
a shallow body of groundwater, easily reached by wells;

41. ancillary work:
a work linked to a principal work;

42. hydraulic works:
sets of modern or traditional devices that are used for the catchment, distribution, use, drainage, protection, and conservation of water;

43. protection perimeter:
a delineated area around a catchment used for the production of drinking water in which various measures are taken and servitudes or prohibitions are prescribed with the aim of protecting the installations and the quality of the captured water;

44. permit holder:
an operator holding an authorization;

45. communal community development plan (PCDC):
a coherent set of programs aimed at introducing positive changes in the life of the commune. The PCDC is the result of a process of analysis, prioritization, arbitration, and choice, taking into account both local realities and interests, the aspirations of the populations, and the ambitions of the leaders;

(Page 12)

46. water pollution:
all discharges, flows, releases, direct or indirect deposits of materials of any kind, and more generally, any act likely to cause or increase the degradation of waters, by modifying their physical, chemical, biological characteristics, whether it be surface waters or groundwaters;

47. well:
an excavation made from the surface of the ground down to an aquifer to draw water from it;

48. water quality:
the set of physical, chemical, biological, and organoleptic properties that make water suitable for the use for which it is intended;

49. discharge:
any product or set of products resulting from human activity whose disposal into the receiving environment, in this case into the waters of the public water domain, causes or is likely to cause the degradation of water resources or, more generally, of the environment;

50. hydrographic network:
the set of permanent or non-permanent natural drainage channels, where waters from runoff or returned by groundwater tables flow, either in the form of springs or by continuous return along the bed of a watercourse;

51. water resources:
the set of surface waters, groundwaters, meteoric waters available and eventual on the territory, as well as rainwater, water from swimming pools, ponds or managed lakes, and wastewater;

52. master plan for water development and management:
a document that determines the fundamental orientations for the rational and sustainable use of water resources at the scale of a hydrographic basin for a determined period;

(Page 13)

CHAPTER II: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

Article 29:
The institutional framework for water resources management is based on the principle of separation of the functions of management and use of water resources.

The water resources manager is responsible for planning, controlling, and regulating the sustainable management of water resources.

The user of water resources is responsible for planning and carrying out water supply or use programs, in compliance with the rights and obligations inherent to the mission of service provision in accordance with this Code.

Article 30:
Water management is organized according to a hierarchy that takes into account the national level, the regional and local levels of hydrographic basins or sub-basins, as well as the level of local authorities or users' associations.

Article 31:
In the management of water resources, the ministry having water management in its attributions relies on the structures listed below to be put in place according to the conditions and priorities of development:

the National Coordinating Committee for the Water Sector, abbreviated as CNCE, whose role is to coordinate the actions and programs of the water sector;

the national agency for the control and regulation of water resources management, whose role is to execute technical, scientific, and administrative missions in the field of control and regulation of water resources management;

the water commissions at the level of basins and sub-basins, whose role is to determine the fundamental orientations for the development of water resources, at the scale of the basin and sub-basin.

(Page 14)

Any other structure that the competent authority deems appropriate to create shall also participate in water management.

Article 32:
Legally recognized users' associations may organize themselves to contribute to actions for the rational use of water, in accordance with the principle of participatory management.

CHAPTER III: FINANCING OF WATER MANAGEMENT

Section 1: The National Water Fund

Article 33:
The financing of water management is ensured by a national fund, placed under the joint responsibility of the Ministers having respectively water management and finance in their attributions.

Article 34:
The rules relating to the management and operating procedures of the fund, including those relating to its resources as well as their allocation, shall be fixed by decree issued on the initiative of the Minister having water management in his attributions, acting jointly with the Minister having finance in his attributions.

Section 2: System of taxes and fees related to water use

Article 35:
By virtue of the "user-pays" principle, natural and legal persons who use drinking water or any other water used for productive or revenue-generating purposes are subject to the payment of a fee, the rate of which is fixed by regulation. The amount of the fee must primarily be used to finance the water sector.

The determination of this amount takes into consideration the social, economic, cultural, and ecological importance of the activity in question, the revenues and profits of any kind that may result from it, as well as the collective charges it imposes, particularly on the State and other public persons, in matters of water management.

(Page 15)

Article 36:
The fees resulting from the application of the principle of responsibility and its corollary "polluter-pays" are proportional to the importance of the pollution or degradation in question. Taxes or fees may be reduced on account of the provisions taken by the liable parties to remedy it.

The payment of a fee determined in application of the preceding paragraph does not preclude the engagement of the civil or criminal liability of the liable party when their activity is the cause of damage or constitutes an offense.

Article 37:
In the event of accidental water pollution, public or private persons who have carried out material or financial interventions to reduce the pollution or its effects are entitled to reimbursement, by the person or persons on whom the responsibility for the accident falls, of the expenses incurred to mitigate or prevent the aggravation of the damage. The reimbursement of the sums due for the interventions carried out is effected without prejudice to the reparation of other damages suffered by the intervening parties.

Article 38:
The modalities for applying the provisions of this section are determined by joint ordinance of the Ministers having respectively finance and water management in their attributions, as well as of the Ministers whose attributions correspond to the activity for which a tax or a financial fee is envisaged.

CHAPTER IV: PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES

Section 1: General provisions

Article 39:
The protection of water resources is assessed in qualitative and quantitative terms and calls for prevention or precautionary measures.

Article 40:
With a view to protecting water resources, the State has the duty to ensure, over time and space, a balance between the availability of water resources, in quantity and quality, and the needs to be satisfied according to the various uses and functions of water.

(Page 16)

Article 41:
The qualitative and quantitative protection of waters is the responsibility of the State, which may, if the general interest justifies it, take particular protection measures and in particular establish protection perimeters.

The Ministry having water management in its attributions retains the right to order, at any time, any control measure intended to regulate the qualitative and quantitative evolution of water resources within the protection perimeters.

Article 42:
Without prejudice to the protection perimeters that may be imposed by virtue of Article 41, when the water resource is threatened, from a qualitative or quantitative point of view, in one or more determined localities, the Minister having water management in his attributions may establish safeguard zones for water resources, which include either absolute or relative restrictions on activities concerning water, or a prior authorization depending on the nature or location of the needs to be satisfied.

The modalities for applying this provision relating to safeguard zones are fixed by ordinance of the Minister having respectively in charge the management of water and the protection of the environment in their attributions.

Section 2: Qualitative protection

Article 43:
The protection perimeter referred to in Article 41 is understood, within the meaning of this Code, as a contour delimiting the geographical domain within which any activity likely to affect the qualitative conservation of water resources is prohibited or regulated.

The protection perimeter thus has the object of ensuring the qualitative protection of waters, whether they come from groundwater tables, surface waters, or rivers and other watercourses.

(Page 17)

Article 44:
The protection perimeters for water resources are determined by decree issued upon the proposal of the Minister having water management in his attributions. The decree specifies the extent of the land to be acquired in full ownership or to be reserved if it is already state-owned. This land must be fenced to precisely mark the protection perimeter.

In case of deprivation of their right, due to the establishment of the protection perimeter by the State, the owners or occupants of the land incorporated into the State domain shall be compensated in accordance with the procedure for expropriation for reasons of public utility in force.

Article 45:
Within the protection perimeters, deposits, installations, and activities likely to directly or indirectly harm the quality of the water or render it unfit for consumption are prohibited.

The prohibition applies mainly to the following activities:

the depositing of garbage, refuse, and detritus;

the spreading of manure, the watering, parking, or raising of animals;

the depositing of hydrocarbons and of all substances presenting risks of toxicity, notably chemical products, fertilizers, and pesticides;

the exploitation of quarries or other open-pit mineral substances;

the installation of wastewater pipes of any nature;

the installation of cemeteries;

the depositing of sludge from septic tank emptying.

Article 46:
In case of necessity, the ministry having water management in its attributions shall delineate, in addition to the protection perimeter referred to in this section, a distant protection perimeter within which the deposits, installations, and activities mentioned in Article 45 are regulated, in order to prevent the dangers of pollution they present for the waters.

(Page 18)

Article 47:
The following must also be subject to qualitative protection by means of a protection perimeter:

dams;

catchments by spring, well, or borehole;

water storage reservoirs;

vulnerable parts of groundwater tables;

all bodies of water intended for human or animal consumption.

Section 3: Quantitative protection

Article 48:
Any withdrawal or any diversion of surface waters that may momentarily or definitively alter their course, harm their free flow, or reduce their beds may not be carried out without prior authorization from the Minister having water management in his attributions.

The procedures for requesting and granting the authorization, as well as the conditions and modalities of withdrawal or diversion and the threshold of the quantity of water to be withdrawn in case of authorization, are determined by ordinance of the Minister having water management in his attributions.

Article 49:
Overexploited or threatened water tables, as well as sections of watercourses for which it is necessary to manage the ecological flow, must be subject to quantitative protection.

The Minister having water management in his attributions shall determine by ordinance the protection measures to be considered. In any event, water metering becomes mandatory for these perimeters subject to protection.

Article 50:
Wetlands must be conserved and protected so that they continue to fully play their natural role in renewing the water resource.

(Page 19)

When considerations of general interest lead to modifying the allocation of a wetland or an aquatic environment, particularly for agricultural or industrial purposes, or with a view to carrying out an urbanization operation, the possible authorization procedure must necessarily go through an environmental impact assessment in accordance with the legal provisions that provide for the organization of this procedure.

The eventual authorization must be accompanied by measures intended to reduce or compensate for the negative impacts of this authorized operation.

Section 4: Control of the well drilling profession

Article 51:
No one may carry out the activity of a well driller or sounder with a view to the research for catchment and exploitation of groundwater, without prior authorization from the Minister having water management in his attributions.

The duly authorized driller or sounder must provide, upon request of the Minister in charge of water management, the information and data relating to his activities.

The technical modalities and requirements for the issuance of the aforementioned authorization are fixed by ordinance of the Minister having water management in his attributions.

CHAPTER V: COMBATING HARMFUL EFFECTS ON WATER

Section 1: Combating water pollution

Article 52:
No one may make discharges, flows, releases, direct or indirect deposits of any kind, and more generally, perform acts or deeds likely to cause or increase the pollution of surface or groundwater, whatever its origin.

The author of the pollution is bound to pay compensation, the amount of which is proportional to the degree of pollution caused, without prejudice to the related penal sanctions, especially by virtue of the provisions of this Code.

(Page 20)

Article 53:
It is forbidden to throw carcasses into the waters or to bury them less than five hundred meters from wells, fountains, public watering troughs, or water protection perimeters.

In areas where the water table is less than two meters deep, it is forbidden to install cemeteries, bury carcasses, dig latrines, install public dumps, or practice burial methods likely to cause water pollution.

Article 54:
Water resources likely to be polluted, taking into account their location or suspicious activities or behaviors in the vicinity, are subject to periodic checks of their physical, chemical, biological, and bacteriological characteristics.

The conditions under which these checks are carried out are fixed by the Minister having water management in his attributions.

Article 55:
When there is a risk of water pollution endangering public health or causing prejudice to the national economy, the Minister having water management in his attributions shall decide to halt the operation of the source of pollution until its disappearance.

Section 2: Combating floods

Article 56:
The ministry in charge of water shall ensure that the rules and decisions on the use of territorial space allow, in case of floods, for the reduction as much as possible of the damage caused to persons and property.

Article 57:
Development projects as well as urban planning documents and plans must take into account the drainage and evacuation of rainwater, which are elements of the right to safety and a healthy environment.

(Page 21)

The design, execution, and operation of works and buildings for residential or other use, installed in flow zones or in flood-prone areas, must respect the free flow of water.

The public authority in charge of the drainage and evacuation of rainwater shall ensure its execution according to the modalities and prescriptions determined by the ministry having water management in its attributions, in collaboration with the ministry in charge of public health.

Article 58:
The ministry having water management in its attributions shall undertake, with the participation, where appropriate, of the concerned territorial and local entities, all public utility works aimed at the construction of flood protection structures.

Article 59:
The Minister in charge of water management and the environment has the latitude to modify or remove ex officio any embankment, deposit of bulky materials, fence, plantation, construction, or any other structure likely to obstruct the flow of water, or to restrict in a harmful way the field of floods on the submersible parts of watercourses.

If compensation is required, it shall be fixed in accordance with the rules of expropriation for reasons of public utility.

Article 60:
The delimitation of the submersible surfaces of the valleys of watercourses falls within the competence of the Minister having water management in his attributions, who shall decide by way of ordinance.

Article 61:
It is forbidden to build on flood protection dikes, to leave any works or obstacles whatsoever on them, or to carry out activities likely to degrade these dikes, to harm the flow of water, or to restrict the field of floods.

(Page 22)

Article 62:
The ministry having water management in its attributions has the mission to develop and implement a plan for flood forecasting and announcement and for flood prevention.

The conditions for the development and implementation of the aforementioned plan are fixed by ordinance of the Minister in charge of water management.

Article 63:
Hydraulic works of national, regional, or local importance shall benefit from protection by the public authorities in order to prevent any threat or harm to public safety and shall be subject to periodic control.

CHAPTER VI: SANITATION OF WASTEWATER AND DISPOSAL OF STORMWATER

Section 1: General provisions

Article 64:
Wastewater sanitation includes the collection, evacuation, transport, purification or treatment of wastewater, as well as the discharge of purified effluents and the treatment of residues from the purification process.

Article 65:
The works, structures, and developments of sanitation infrastructures are subject to the environmental and social impact assessment procedure, and may only be carried out after authorization from the Minister having water and environmental protection in his attributions.

Section 2: Domestic wastewater

Article 66:
Domestic wastewater, particularly household water from kitchens, toilet wastewater, as well as effluents from septic tanks, may not be discharged into the pipes or sewers used for the evacuation of rainwater or directly into watercourses and lakes.

(Page 23)

The aforementioned authorities may set less stringent conditions than those fixed for the discharge of wastewater into a public pipeline, when it concerns the treatment of wastewater from isolated buildings, with few inhabitants, or if there is no possibility of connection to a public pipeline.

TITLE IV: DIFFERENT USES OF WATER FROM THE PUBLIC WATER DOMAIN

CHAPTER I: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 84:
No water intake or discharge structure, no withdrawal or discharge may, except for the exception provided for by this Code, be practiced on the public water domain without authorization, concession, or delegation from the Minister having water management in his attributions.

Nevertheless, the withdrawal and use of water from the public water domain for domestic purposes may be freely practiced.

Article 85:
Are considered as allocated for domestic purposes, within the meaning of this title, the withdrawal and use of water intended exclusively for satisfying the needs of natural persons within the limits of the quantities of water necessary for human consumption, for hygiene care, for washing, and for plant or animal productions reserved for the family consumption of these persons.

Article 86:
The Minister having water management in his attributions may exceptionally take measures of limitation or provisional suspension of the uses of water referred to in Article 85, to face a threat or the consequences of accidents, drought, floods, or a serious risk of shortage.

(Page 24)

CHAPTER II: RIGHT OF USE OF WATER FROM THE PUBLIC WATER DOMAIN

Article 87:
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 84, paragraph 2, and 85, the right of use on the waters of the public water domain may be granted by the Minister having water management in his attributions, to any natural or legal person of public or private law, under the conditions and according to the modalities fixed in the following articles of this chapter.

Article 88:
Users of the waters of the public water domain have a revocable right under the conditions determined by regulation.

Article 89:
The use of water is governed by the order of priority fixed by the Government according to the local or regional specificities of ecological needs. The establishment of these priorities relates in particular to:

the satisfaction of the needs for drinking water for the population and for the watering of livestock;

the satisfaction of the water needs of agriculture, including fishing and aquaculture;

the satisfaction of the needs of industry and hydroelectricity;

the development of navigable waterways;

the development of waters presenting an interest from a tourist and leisure point of view.

Article 90:
The right of use confers upon its holder the prerogative of having at his disposal a flow or a volume of water calculated on the basis of hydro-climatological and hydrological data of an average year. It also confers upon him the right to know the quality and quantity of available water.

(Page 25)

Article 91:
The right referred to in Article 90 is, however, limited in the case of failure of the retention, mobilization, and supply, withdrawal, and diversion works, or in the case of shortage due to climatic factors and, in a general manner, of unforeseeable insufficiency of the flow or volume which forms the object of the right of use.

In this case, the Minister having water management in his attributions has the faculty to decide on the ex officio reduction of the quantities of water due to each of the users and to fix a different reduction rate according to an adapted order of priority, all without any indemnity.

The users of water have the right to exploit the resource within the limits of the object for which it is intended.

Article 92:
Any holder of a right of use of water is bound by the following obligations:

to use the water in a rational and economic manner, avoiding all waste;

to strictly observe the conditions established for the commissioning of the right of use;

to respect the rights of other legitimate users of the water;

to submit to the regular metering of water and to the conditions under which it operates;

to pay the fees that are due.

Article 93:
In case of transfer of the property, the right of use of the water is transferred to the new owner who must declare the transfer to obtain its validation within a period of six months, from the date of the property transfer, failing which he loses the benefit of it.

In case of division of the property benefiting from the right of use of the water, the distribution of waters between the resulting parcels must be the object of new rights of use which replace the original right of use.

(Page 26)

CHAPTER III: THE REGIME OF AUTHORIZATION AND CONCESSION FOR WATERS OF THE PUBLIC WATER DOMAIN

Section 1: Provisions common to authorization

Article 94:
The following activities, in particular, are subject to the authorization regime:

withdrawals and uses of waters from the public water domain practiced by means of non-permanent works;

plantations and cultures on the banks and in the beds of watercourses and lakes;

research and catchment works for groundwater, whether gushing or not, including geothermal, excluding the use of these waters;

catchment and use works for natural spring waters that are not susceptible to exploitation for a purpose of general interest;

works for cleaning, deepening, rectifying, or regularizing watercourses;

the extraction of sand, stones, earth, gravel, and any other material from the bed and banks of watercourses or lakes.

The authorization remains attached to the person who requested and obtained the benefit and ends upon the death or cessation of the activities of this person, without prejudice for their successors to request in turn the benefit in their own name.

Article 95:
The following activities or operations are subject to the concession regime:

the development of hydraulic, hydroelectric infrastructures and the distribution of drinking water;

boreholes or withdrawals of waters from the public water domain as well as their exploitation for the purpose of hydroelectric energy production practiced by means of water intakes, hydroelectric plants, or other works of a permanent nature;

(Page 27)

the construction of permanent dams or weirs as well as the use of retained or diverted waters;

marsh development projects;

integrated watershed management.

Article 96:
Activities not listed in the nomenclature of Article 94, but which could also be envisaged in the context of the use of the appurtenances of the public water domain, may be classified by the ministry having water management in its attributions, either under the authorization regime or under the concession regime, with regard to their more or less significant impact on water resources.

Article 97:
The application for authorization or concession is addressed to the Ministers having in their respective attributions the management of the water resource and the activities requiring the use of water for which the use or concession is requested.

An ordinance from the competent Minister also specifies the modalities of the inquiries to be conducted before the issuance of the authorization or concession.

Article 98:
Without prejudice to the requirements related to the environmental and social impact assessment procedure, applications for authorization or concession are refused when:

the needs to be satisfied at the level of the application are not justified;

their satisfaction is detrimental to the qualitative or quantitative protection of water resources;

said applications harm the interests of the national economy or are contrary to the previously established rights of third parties.

(Page 28)

Article 99:
Any authorization or any concession remains precarious and revocable:

either as a sanction, for non-observance of the legal or regulatory provisions in force, or for violation of the obligations stipulated in the act of authorization or concession;

or in the general interest to satisfy the requirements of public health, to prevent or stop floods, or for any other cause of public utility.

Article 100:
In case of revocation of the authorization or concession as a sanction, no indemnity is due to the user of the public water domain, who could even be sued to pay indemnities or fines, due to the consequences linked to the acts and facts of violation of the legal provisions or clauses imposed by the act of authorization or concession.

If, on the other hand, the revocation of the authorization or concession is dictated by the general interest, the user shall be compensated up to the prejudice suffered, in accordance with the procedure of expropriation for reasons of public utility.

Furthermore, if there is an abuse of power, the indemnity is due by the person responsible for the incriminating act.

Article 101:
Without prejudice to the particular clauses appearing in the act of authorization or concession, the revocation of the aforementioned act may be decided on account, in particular, of the following breaches:

the use of waters other than those that have been granted or authorized;

the waste or misuse of waters;

the non-observance of the prescriptions of this Code and of the regulations enacted for its application;

the non-payment of the fees stipulated in the acts of authorization or concession or by the provisions of this Code;

(Page 29)

However, in the case where adduction and distribution installations and networks are already in place, the new establishment must harmonize its policy of withdrawal and water supply with the one already existing.

Article 127:
Any industrial installation is subject to a prior environmental impact assessment in accordance with the regulations relating to the procedure for this study.

The applicant must take all necessary measures at the time of design and during the operation of the installation to limit water consumption, and to preserve the environment at the different stages of production.

Article 128:
In the hydroelectric industry sector, any work to be constructed in the bed or on the bank of a watercourse must include devices allowing for the maintenance of a minimum flow guaranteeing permanently the life, circulation, and reproduction of the species that populate the waters.

The work must also include devices preventing the penetration of fish into the supply and tailrace canals.

Article 129:
Without prejudice to the prescriptions of Article 128, regulatory measures shall determine the technical conditions for the development of hydroelectric plants, which are previously subject to an environmental and social impact assessment.

Section 4: Navigation, transport, tourism, and recreation related to water

Article 130:
Navigation and transport on lakes and watercourses are governed by the legislative and regulatory provisions in force, under the supervision of the authorities having these sectors within their competences.

(Page 30)

Article 131:
Swimming pools, bathing areas, and other water reserves where swimming or leisure exercises take place, must be regularly subject to a hygiene and safety control.

The control mainly concerns the chemical and biological analysis of the water, as well as the general cleanliness around the swimming pools, bathing areas, and other water reserves.

The Minister having water management in his attributions in collaboration with the Minister in charge of public health and the Minister having civil protection in his attributions, shall determine by ordinance, the health and safety standards that swimming pools, bathing areas, and other sites comprising water reserves for leisure and tourism purposes must meet.

TITLE VI: TRANSBOUNDARY WATERS

Article 132:
The provisions of this Code and those of their implementing measures apply without prejudice to the international or regional conventions ratified by Burundi with regard to the use, development, and protection of shared water resources.

Upon the proposal of the Minister in charge of water, the Government shall see to the promotion of regional and international conventions for a concerted and integrated management of transboundary waters.

TITLE VII: PENAL PROVISIONS

Article 133:
Without prejudice to the provisions provided for in the penal legislation in force, the provisions of this title govern the modalities of prevention and repression of violations of the provisions of this Code.

Article 134:
In addition to judicial police officers and agents with general competence, as well as police officers and agents having environmental protection in their attributions, [...]

(Page 31)

TITLE VIII: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 153:
This Code does not affect the rights acquired and exercised by virtue of Decree-Law No. 1/41 of 26 November 1992 on the institution and organization of the public water domain, of Decree No. 100/241 of 31 December 1992 on the regulation of the evacuation of wastewater in urban areas, and of Law No. 1/014 of 11 August 2000 on the liberalization and regulation of the public service for drinking water and electrical energy, provided that these acquired rights have been exercised without interruption following acts or facts attributable to the fault or negligence of the holder of the aforementioned rights.

Article 154:
It is incumbent upon the holder of a right referred to in Article 156 to claim its exercise, by means of a written declaration to the Minister having water management in his attributions within a period of two years from the date of promulgation of this Code.

Any claim presented after the expiration of the period referred to in paragraph 1 of this article is received as a new application for authorization or concession, and is processed as such in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Code.

Article 155:
The Minister having water management in his attributions shall proceed to the verification of any acquired right claimed in a timely manner, on the basis of the relevant elements provided by the applicant and those that the Minister himself has been able to collect. The duly established rights are confirmed and registered by the Ministry according to the modalities fixed by ordinance.

The Minister may nevertheless restrict the exercise of any established acquired right, by adding any restrictive condition that he deems necessary to respond to a better management of the country's hydraulic resources, by means of a prior, just, and equitable indemnity.

Article 156:
Pending the development of the public sewer network, where effluents can be discharged, the creation and use of latrines, toilets, and cesspools are tolerated.

(Page 32)

They must be developed according to the conditions and modalities fixed by an ordinance on health measures established jointly by the Ministers having public health and the environment in their attributions.

Article 157:
All previous provisions contrary to this law are hereby repealed.

Article 158:
This law enters into force on the day of its promulgation.

Done at Bujumbura, on 26 March 2012

Pierre NKURUNZIZA
[Signature]

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC,

[Seal: REPUBLIKA Y'UBURUNDI - PRESIDENCE]

SEEN AND SEALED WITH THE SEAL OF THE REPUBLIC,

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND KEEPER OF THE SEALS,

Pascal BARANDAGIYE
[Signature]
[Seal: REPUBLIQUE DU BURUNDI - MINISTERE DE LA JUSTICE - TRAVAIL-HONNEUR]