II. Pre-Constitutional Regulations
Law No. 2066, of April 11, 2000,
Law on the Provision and Use of Potable Water and
Sanitary Sewerage Services

HUGO BÁNZER SUÁREZ, PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
Whereas the Honorable National Congress has sanctioned the following Law:

THE HONORABLE NATIONAL CONGRESS DECREES:

TITLE I
GENERAL ASPECTS

CHAPTER I
OBJECT AND SCOPE OF THE LAW

ARTICLE 1. OBJECT
The purpose of this Law is to establish the norms that regulate the provision and use of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services and the institutional framework that governs them, the procedure for granting Concessions, Licenses, and Registries for the provision of services, the rights to set Prices, Tariffs, Rates, and Quotas, as well as the determination of infractions and sanctions.

ARTICLE 2. SCOPE OF APPLICATION
All natural or legal persons, public or private, regardless of their form of constitution, that provide, are Users of, or are linked to any of the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services are subject to this Law throughout the national territory.

ARTICLE 3. BASIC SANITATION
The Basic Sanitation sector comprises the following services: potable water, sanitary sewerage, excreta disposal, solid waste, and pluvial drainage.

ARTICLE 4. SCOPE OF THE LAW
This Law applies to the basic services of Potable Water and Sewerage and creates the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

ARTICLE 5. PRINCIPLES
The principles that govern the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services are:

a) Universality of access to services,
b) Quality and continuity in the services, consistent with human development policies,
c) Efficiency in the use and allocation of resources for the provision and use of services,
d) Recognition of the economic value of the services, which must be compensated by their beneficiaries according to socio-economic and social equity criteria,
e) Sustainability of the services,
f) Neutrality of treatment for all providers and Users of the services, within the same category.
g) Protection of the environment.

ARTICLE 6. SECTORAL REGULATION SYSTEM
The Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services of the Basic Sanitation Sector are incorporated into the Sectoral Regulation System (SIRESE) and are subject to the provisions contained in Law No. 1600, Law of the Sectoral Regulation System of October 28, 1994, its regulations, and this Law and its regulations.

ARTICLE 7. PUBLIC UTILITY
The works intended for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services are of public interest, have the character of public utility, and are under the protection of the State.

CHAPTER II
DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 8. DEFINITIONS
For the application of this Law, the following definitions are established:
a) Potable Water: Water suitable for human consumption in accordance with the requirements established by current regulations.
b) Wastewater or Used Water: Liquid waste from the discharge of water use in domestic or other activities.
c) Treated Wastewater: Wastewater processed in treatment systems to meet the quality requirements for the class of Receiving Body into which it will be discharged.
d) Authorization for the use and appropriation of water resources for potable water service: Administrative act by which the competent Water Resource Authority, on behalf of the Bolivian State, grants the right to use and appropriate this resource for the provision of potable water services.
e) Potable Water Connection: Set of pipes and accessories that allow the entry of Potable Water from the distribution network to the User's internal facilities.
f) Sanitary Sewerage Connection: Set of pipes and accessories that allow the discharge of Wastewater from the user's internal facilities to the sewerage network.
g) Concession: Administrative act by which the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, on behalf of the Bolivian State, grants an EPSA the right to provide Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services.
h) Receiving Body: Water course or deposit or place where Wastewater is discharged.
i) Quota: Community contribution made by users to the organization formed for the provision of potable water or sanitary sewerage services in indigenous and native peoples, indigenous and peasant communities, associations, organizations and peasant unions, water committees, and provincial and urban cooperatives.
j) Discharge: The release of wastewater into a receiving body.
k) Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Service Provider Entity (EPSA): A public or private legal person that provides one or more of the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services and has one of the following forms of constitution:
i. Municipal public company, dependent on one or more municipal governments.
ii. Mixed-capital corporation.
iii. Private company.
iv. Public services cooperative.
v. Civil association.
vi. Indigenous and native peoples, indigenous and peasant communities, associations, organizations, and peasant unions.
vii. Water committees, small independent urban systems, neighborhood councils, and any other organization with a legal structure recognized by law, except for Municipal Governments.
l) Indexation: Formula for readjusting prices and tariffs calculated based on variations in price indices in the country, expressed in national currency, corresponding to the direct costs of the concession holder.
m) License: Administrative act by which the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation certifies that an EPSA or a municipal government that provides Potable Water Services or Sanitary Sewerage Services directly complies with the requirements that govern Tariffs, Rates, or Quotas and is eligible to access government projects and programs in the sector.
n) Price: Amount charged by the service provider to Users for connections, reconnections, installation of meters, and similar operational concepts.
o) Water Resource: Water in the state in which it is found in nature.
p) Registry: Administrative act by which the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation certifies that the EPSA corresponding to indigenous and native peoples, indigenous and peasant communities, associations, and peasant unions provides the potable water service and is eligible to access government projects and programs in the sector.
q) Potable Water Service: Public service that comprises one or more of the activities of abstraction, conduction, treatment, and storage of Water Resources to convert them into Potable Water and the system of distribution to Users through pipe networks or alternative means.
r) Sanitary Sewerage Services: Public service that comprises one or more of the activities of collection, treatment, and disposal of Wastewater in Receiving Bodies.
s) Superintendency of Basic Sanitation: Superintendency that is part of the Sectoral Regulation System, SIRESE. An organization with national jurisdiction that performs the function of regulating the provision and use of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services.
t) Tariff: Unit value that an EPSA charges a User for any of the Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services.
u) Rate: A tax that a municipal government charges a User, for which the generating event is the effective provision of one or more of the Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services, individualized for the taxpayer. Its collection must not have a destination different from the service that constitutes the budget of the obligation.
v) Regulation Fee: Amount charged by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation for the regulation service to concession holders.
w) Holder: Legal person that has obtained a Concession, License, or Registry from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.
x) User: Any natural or legal person, public or private, that uses any of the Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services.
y) Useful life of the service: Operating time of the potable water and sewerage services for their provision in accordance with technical standards.
z) Uses and customs for the provision of potable water and sanitary sewerage services: Community and social practices for the use, appropriation, and management of water resources for the provision of potable water and sanitary sewerage services, based on natural authorities, procedures, and socially agreed-upon norms that are part of indigenous and native peoples, peasant and indigenous communities, and peasant organizations and unions.
aa) Non-Concession Zone: A human settlement whose population is dispersed or, if concentrated, does not exceed 10,000 inhabitants and is not financially self-sustainable.
bb) Concession Zone: A concentrated population center where more than 10,000 inhabitants live, or an association of human settlements or a commonwealth of Municipal Governments, for the provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services whose joint population is equal to or greater than 10,000 inhabitants and where the provision of services is financially self-sustainable. Populations of less than 10,000 inhabitants that demonstrate self-sustainability will be admitted into the Concession.

CHAPTER III
POTABLE WATER AND SANITARY SEWERAGE SERVICES

ARTICLE 9. NATIONAL JURISDICTION
The policies, norms, and regulation of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage services are of national jurisdiction. Concessions, the regulation of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage services, and related easements are under the jurisdiction of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

TITLE II
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

CHAPTER I
PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS

ARTICLE 10. MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND BASIC SERVICES
The Ministry of Basic Services has the following powers and obligations in the area of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services:
a) Formulate and/or execute policies for the provision of the Services and their development in the country,
b) Formulate the regulatory framework,
c) Formulate financial policies for the development and sustainability of the services,
d) Formulate policies and norms aimed at protecting the safety and rights of the Users of the services,
e) Formulate policies and norms aimed at protecting the safety and rights of the Users of the services,
f) Annually prepare plans for the expansion of coverage and improvement of the quality of services in the country,
g) Promote private participation in the investment and management of the services,
h) Design and promote programs for the expansion and improvement of the quality of services in peri-urban and rural areas,
i) Manage financing from international cooperation to promote the development of the services,
j) Foster and promote technical assistance, human resource training, scientific and technological research, and sanitary education programs,
k) Develop service information systems,
l) Promote the institutional development of service provider entities, m) Exercise oversight over the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

ARTICLE 11. MINISTRY OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING
The Ministry of Sustainable Development and Planning is responsible for the sustainable management of the water resource, having the following responsibilities corresponding to the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services:
a) Ensure that the allocation of water volumes, carried out by the corresponding Superintendency, for the supply of potable water to Concession Zones and Non-Concession Zones, respects the planning of the National Water Authority according to water balances and resource availability,
b) Monitor that the works, activities, or projects carried out in the national territory do not threaten the sustainability of the services object of this Law,
c) Coordinate with the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services the formulation and application of environmental norms related to the services, in a manner consistent with the tariff revisions referred to in Title VI of this Law, which must be supervised by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.
d) Control the quality of Water Resources and prevent their contamination, in coordination with the competent sectoral organizations.

ARTICLE 12. DEPARTMENTAL PREFECTURES
The Departmental Prefectures, within their jurisdiction, are responsible for:
a) Preparing and developing departmental plans and programs for the expansion of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, within the framework of the provisions of this Law and its regulations,
b) Coordinating with the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services and the Municipal Governments the supervision and control of the execution and quality of infrastructure works for Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services, financed with public resources,
c) Fostering the association of human settlements for the joint provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services, in coordination with the Municipal Governments within the framework of urban and territorial planning plans for each municipality.
d) Informing the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services about non-governmental organizations and other entities that carry out activities related to Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services.
e) Providing technical assistance to the provider entities of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services.

ARTICLE 13. MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS
Municipal governments, within their jurisdiction, are responsible for:
a) Ensuring the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, through an EPSA concessioned by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, in accordance with this Law, or directly when appropriate, in concordance with the powers granted by Law to the Municipalities, regarding the municipal competence for Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services,
b) Proposing, before the competent authority, and developing municipal plans and programs for the expansion of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services; identifying and making viable the required easement areas, within the framework of the provisions of this Law and its regulations,
c) Considering the expropriation requests submitted by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation and proceeding according to the powers granted by Law to the Municipal Governments,
d) Assisting in the evaluation and monitoring of the activities of the EPSAs in their jurisdiction and submitting their observations and criteria to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation,
e) Submitting periodic reports to the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services and to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation regarding the status of the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services in their jurisdiction and, especially, when the service is under their responsibility,
f) Collecting Rates determined by regulation and approved according to law, when they directly provide any of the Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services,
g) Monitoring that the works, activities, or projects carried out in their jurisdiction do not threaten the sustainability and quality of the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services and bringing the corresponding infractions to the attention of the competent authorities,
h) Informing the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services and the Prefecture about non-governmental organizations and other entities that carry out activities related to Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services in the territory of the municipality,
i) Providing technical assistance to the provider entities of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services,
j) Issuing a technically founded opinion before the Superintendency, in consultation with the instances of popular participation established by article 150, paragraph II) of the Law of Municipalities for the approval of bidding documents, the signing of contracts by exception, and the approval of prices and tariffs.

CHAPTER II
REGULATORY BODIES

ARTICLE 14. SUPERINTENDENCY OF BASIC SANITATION
The Superintendency of Basic Sanitation is created as part of the Sectoral Regulation System (SIRESE), replacing the Superintendency of Water, which was part of SIRESE. From the promulgation of this Law, the obligations, rights, powers, and attributions provided for in all legal provisions relating to the Superintendency of Water of SIRESE, corresponding to the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, are transferred to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

ARTICLE 15. FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE SUPERINTENDENCY OF BASIC SANITATION
The highest executive authority of this institution is the Superintendent of Basic Sanitation, whose form of appointment is established in Law No. 1600, Law of the Sectoral Regulation System (SIRESE), of October 28, 1994.

The Superintendent of Basic Sanitation shall have the following powers, attributions, and obligations:
a) The general powers established by Law No. 1600 and its complementary norms, Supreme Decree 24504 of February 21, 1997, the specific ones of this Law and its regulations,
b) To comply with and enforce this Law and its regulations,
c) To grant concessions and Licenses for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services and to subscribe the corresponding contracts,
d) To declare and order the revocation of Concessions,
e) To ensure compliance with the obligations and rights of the Holders of the Concessions,
f) To intervene in the EPSAs, holders of a concession, and to appoint interveners, in the cases provided for by this Law and its Regulations,
g) To approve quality, expansion, and development goals for the EPSAs, consistent with the plans for expanding coverage and improving the quality of services, as indicated in article 10 (subsection f) of this Law,
h) To recommend the Rates that municipal governments should charge for Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services when they are provided directly by the municipality and to submit the pertinent recommendations to the Ministry of Finance for the elaboration of the technical opinion in accordance with the powers granted by Law to the municipalities,
i) To protect the rights of the Users of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services, of the EPSAs, and of the State,
j) To ensure that the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage services comply with the anti-monopoly and consumer protection provisions established in Law No. 1600, Law of the Sectoral Regulation System, of October 10, 1994, and to take the necessary actions to correct any non-compliance,
k) To require from the EPSAs information on planning, technical, financial, and commercial projections to evaluate objectives, goals, rules of action, and quality parameters for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services,
l) To implement and maintain a technical, financial, commercial, and institutional information system for the EPSAs and the Concession contracts, as well as for the Licenses for the provision of services,
m) To submit to the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services the information indicated in subsections k) and l) and that related to Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, which is not of a confidential nature according to legal or contractual provisions, for the purpose of formulating sectoral policies and without this implying interference with the oversight and regulatory powers of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation,
n) To approve and verify the application of the maximum Prices and Tariffs for Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services and to publish them in national or local media,
o) To request, when appropriate, the opinion of the municipal governments regarding the plans presented by the EPSAs, to make them compatible with the planning and promotion of corresponding urban and rural development,
p) To impose the easements requested by the Holders of Concessions, for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, in accordance with applicable legal norms,
q) To submit to the corresponding Municipal Government a technical opinion on the expropriation request made by the Holder of the Concession, in accordance with the procedure to be established by regulation,
r) To apply the sanctions determined by Law, regulations and, when appropriate, those established in the Concession contracts,
s) To bring to the attention of the competent authorities the infractions related to the protection of the environment in the development of the activities of the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services.

ARTICLE 16. FINANCING
The budget of expenditures of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation and the aliquot for the General Superintendency of SIRESE will be financed by the Regulation Fee and other financial resources.

When the revenues of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation are not sufficient for the due control of the EPSAs, SIRESE shall cover the difference with resources from other sectors of SIRESE itself.

The said Regulation Fee must be paid by all providers of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services subject to regulation and shall not be greater than two percent (2%) of the net income from the sale of these services, after deducting indirect taxes. The Regulation Fee for each provider of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services will be defined based on technical parameters that allow for its qualification, following the procedure and terms established in the regulation.

TITLE III
SERVICE PROVIDER ENTITIES

CHAPTER I
RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS

ARTICLE 17. FORMS OF SERVICE PROVISION
The provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services is the responsibility of municipal governments, in accordance with the provisions of this Law, its regulations, and other current legal provisions. This responsibility may be executed directly or through third parties, depending on whether it is a Concession Zone or a Non-Concession Zone. In Concession Zones, the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services will be carried out compulsorily through an EPSA.

In Non-Concession Zones, municipal governments may provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services directly or through an EPSA. The National Government will promote the formation of commonwealths of peoples for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services through EPSAs.

ARTICLE 18. CONCESSIONS AND LICENSES FOR THE PROVISION OF SERVICES
EPSAs that provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services in Concession Zones must obtain a Concession from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, in accordance with Title IV of this Law. EPSAs or municipal governments that provide any of the Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services directly in Non-Concession Zones must obtain a License from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, in accordance with the same Title.

ARTICLE 19. PRIVATE PARTICIPATION
Private entities may participate in the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, through a Concession, in accordance with regulations. The State will promote the participation of the private sector in the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services.

ARTICLE 20. PARTICIPATION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
Legally constituted and recognized non-governmental organizations by a competent authority may provide Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services through concessions and/or licenses and participate in works and actions related to them, having to adapt and frame their activities to the national policies and norms of the sector, contemplated in this Law, its regulations, and related norms.

ARTICLE 21. QUALITY OF SERVICES
Providers of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services are obliged to guarantee the quality of the services received by the Users, in accordance with current norms.

ARTICLE 22. NON-DISCRIMINATION OF USERS
Providers of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services, whatever their nature, have the obligation to offer the service to any User who requests it within their Concession area, based on the deadlines established in the Concession contracts for the expansion of service coverage. Providers of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services may not discriminate between Users of the same tariff category in the provision of services.

ARTICLE 23. CONSERVATION OF WATER AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Providers of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services must protect the environment in accordance with the provisions of Law 1333 of July 15, 1992, and its regulations, as well as promote the efficient use and conservation of potable water, through the use of equipment, materials, and construction techniques that do not deteriorate the environment and that contribute to water conservation, the promotion of the use of water-saving devices, and guidance to Users for the reduction of leaks within the Potable Water systems, as well as the adequate treatment and disposal of Wastewater.

ARTICLE 24. RIGHTS OF SERVICE PROVIDERS
The EPSAs have the following rights:
a) To charge Tariffs according to what is established in this Law and its regulations,
b) To charge for services provided to Users, with the approval of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, according to regulations,
c) To suspend services for the reasons indicated in this Law and its regulations,
d) To charge fines to Users, according to regulations,
e) Others established by regulation or by the Concession contract, as applicable.

CHAPTER II
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE 25. INDEPENDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES
The income from the provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services, whether by an EPSA or by a municipal government directly, must be managed in independent accounting and may only be used for the provision of said services.

ARTICLE 26. APPROVAL OF BUDGETS
For the formulation of the General Budget of the Nation, the Ministry of Finance will require from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation a technical opinion on the budget proposals of the EPSAs organized as public or municipal companies subject to regulation and must consult with said Superintendency any modification to the aforementioned budget projects, for its subsequent submission to the National Congress. These companies will charge Tariffs for the provision of services. The opinion must indicate the impact of the proposed Tariff on the EPSA's budget and its implications for the fulfillment of the obligations contained in the Concession granted by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

The Ministry of Finance will consult the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation on the budget projects of the municipal units in charge of the provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services directly, subject to regulation. These units will charge Rates for the provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services. The Rates must be approved by the Honorable National Senate, in accordance with the powers granted by Law to the municipalities.

The Ministry of Finance will send a technical opinion to the Honorable National Senate, at the same time that a municipal government requests the approval of the Rate, in accordance with the provisions of article 102 of Law No. 696, Organic Law of Municipalities, of January 10, 1985. The opinion must indicate the impact of the proposed Rate on the budget of the unit providing Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services of the municipal government and its implications for the fulfillment of the obligations contained in the License granted by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation to the Municipal Government.

ARTICLE 27. PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The Holders of Concession contracts must annually present to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation their financial statements and cash flow, evaluated by an external auditor. In addition, they must provide technical, legal, and administrative information on their operations, as well as reports on their activities, accidents, and contingencies, in accordance with what is agreed in the Concession contract.

The provider entities of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services under License, including municipal governments that provide services directly, must present to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation legal, technical, and financial information in a simplified format that will be established by regulation.

TITLE IV
CONCESSIONS, LICENSES, AND REGISTRIES

CHAPTER I
CONCESSIONS

ARTICLE 28. ORIGINAL DOMAIN OF THE STATE
The lacustrine, fluvial, medicinal, surface, and underground waters, whatever their nature, quality, condition, class, or use, are of the original domain of the State.

ARTICLE 29. CONCESSIONS FOR POTABLE WATER AND SANITARY SEWERAGE SERVICES
The EPSAs that provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services in Concession Zones must request the respective Concession for the provision of the Service from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation. No natural or legal person of a public or private nature, civil association with or without lucrative purposes, corporation, cooperative, municipal, or of any other nature, may provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services in Concession Zones without the due Concession issued by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation. This provision is not mandatory for potable water committees, cooperatives, neighborhood councils, and in general, independent urbanizations referred to in article 34.

The requirement to obtain a Concession is excepted only for EPSAs and municipal governments that provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services directly, in Non-Concession Zones.

The Concessions for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services are granted, modified, renewed, or revoked by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, on behalf of the State, through an administrative resolution, in accordance with the procedures established by regulation. The Concession contracts must contain, at a minimum, the rights and obligations of the concessionaires of the Holders established in this Law and its regulations.

The Concessions for Potable Water Services and for Sanitary Sewerage Services must be granted jointly.

The Concession for Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services will be granted for a maximum term of forty (40) years in accordance with the Regulation.

ARTICLE 30. PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING CONCESSIONS
Concessions will be granted through national or international public bidding. The bidding documents will establish a clear award criterion which must be the lease fee, the tariff, the investments to be made, the number of connections, or another variable. The previously cited variables, which are necessary and not used as a selection criterion, must have pre-defined goals in the bidding documents.

The EPSAs that provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services at the date of promulgation of this Law, and which have not been concessioned, must regularize their situation before the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, without a bidding procedure, under the conditions established by this law and its regulations.

ARTICLE 31. CONCESSION FOR THE PROVISION OF POTABLE WATER SERVICES AND AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE AND APPROPRIATION OF WATER RESOURCES
The Concession for the provision of the potable water and sewerage service and the authorization for the use and appropriation of water resources for said purpose will be granted for the same term by a joint resolution of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation and the competent authority for the water resource.

In no case does the authorization granted for the use and appropriation of the Water Resource confer the right to provide Potable Water Services.

The EPSAs that provide Potable Water Services at the date of promulgation of this Law will have a preferential right for the authorization of the use and appropriation of the specific sources of the Water Resource they use in the provision of the Service.

ARTICLE 32. CONTRACTS WITH THIRD PARTIES
The Holder of the Concession for Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services may enter into contracts with third parties. The Holder of the Concession must ensure that the works, goods, or services contracted are of adequate quality and at competitive prices, and will be solely responsible before the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

ARTICLE 33. TRANSFER OF CONCESSIONS
The Concessions for Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services may only be transferred with prior authorization from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, guaranteeing the fulfillment of the contractual commitments acquired by the holder of a concession through the sale of shares or other equivalent transaction. The assignments and transfers of shares that do not affect the effective control of the holder of the concession will be carried out freely and do not require the approval of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.

ARTICLE 34. SERVICE CONCESSION AREA
The Concession area for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services must be clearly defined in the respective Concession contract. Said area will be for the use of the Holder and must be in accordance with the municipal development plans of the municipalities where it is located. The procedure for the expansion of a concession area will be established by regulation and in the Concession contract.
The potable water committees, small cooperatives, neighborhood councils, and in general, independent urbanizations that have a legal personality recognized by law, that provide potable water and sanitary sewerage services and have not been specified, being within the Concession area of the Holder, may:
a) Maintain their independence, having to request the respective Concession or License from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, guaranteeing the provision of potable water in adequate quantity and quality, in accordance with the corresponding technical standards, and have a sanitary sewerage network or connect to that of the concession holder, being unavoidable to comply with environmental standards. In these cases, the Concession Area of the holder will be specified by Resolution, in order to consider these zones independent;
b) Agree with the holder of the Concession their incorporation into the network operated by the latter, in which case they must agree on the recognition of the value of the sanitary assets for the purpose of defining the tariffs in the integrated areas in accordance with the regulations.

From the entry into force of this Law, within the Concession Area of a Holder, the construction of new works for the provision of potable water or sanitary sewerage services carried out by third parties is not permitted.

ARTICLE 35. CONCESSION CONTRACTS
The Concession contracts for Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services must be signed between the Superintendent of Basic Sanitation and the Holder. The Concession contract must contain at least the following:
a) Legal identification of the Holder and legal documentation evidencing its organization and operation in accordance with the law,
b) Object and term,
c) The technical characteristics and location of existing and planned installations, and the limits of the Concession area,
d) The rights and obligations of the Holder,
e) The investment program and execution schedule,
f) Sufficient and effective guarantees of contract fulfillment established in the regulation,
g) The grounds and effects of the declaration of revocation,
h) The conditions under which the contract may be modified,
i) The sanctions for non-compliance,
j) The technical and quality conditions of the supply,
k) The parameters of service continuity,
l) Definition of cases of force majeure.
m) The stipulations relating to the protection and conservation of the environment,
n) The other stipulations that are necessary or legally required for the due fulfillment of this Law, its regulations, and the contract,
o) Have a legal domicile in the country.

CHAPTER II
EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION OF CONCESSIONS

ARTICLE 36. GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION
The following are grounds for revocation of the Concessions for the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services:
a) When the Holder modifies the object for which the Concession was granted, without the approval of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation,
b) When there is a declarative order of bankruptcy of the Holder,
c) When the Holder repeatedly commits serious infractions according to the regulation,
d) When it breaches the Concession contract,
e) When the Holder transfers or cedes the Concession without prior approval from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, and
f) Others that are specifically established in the Concession contract.
g) Non-compliance with the agreements contracted in application of articles 38 and 41 of this Law.

ARTICLE 37. EXPIRATION OR REVOCATION AND TRANSFER
Upon the expiration of the Concession term, or after its revocation, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation will conduct a public bidding process to grant a new Concession and to transfer to the new Holder all the assets affected by the service, including, but not limited to, the installations, equipment, works, rights, and information based on what is established in the Regulation. The determination of the value of the payment that the ceasing holder will receive for the assets affected by the concession will be established in the concession contract. The ceasing Holder has the obligation to cooperate with the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation during the bidding and transfer process. In case of non-cooperation, the sanctions established in the Regulation of this Law will be applied. The ceasing holder may participate in the bidding except in the case of revocation.

The installations, equipment, works, and rights of the ceasing Holder will be transferred to the new Holder according to the value of the amortized fixed asset or net of depreciation as it appears in the books, deducting the expenses incurred in the process, and any unpaid fines and sanctions.

If the value of the bidding is greater, any difference with respect to what is due to be paid to the ceasing Holder will be transferred to the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services and will be allocated to finance Basic Sanitation projects in Non-Concession Zones according to the highest poverty index.

ARTICLE 38. PREVENTIVE INTERVENTION
When the normal provision of services is at risk due to non-compliance with expansion, quality, or efficiency goals, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, through a public procedure and a duly founded administrative resolution, may decide on the preventive intervention of the Concession Holder for a period not exceeding six non-extendable months.

At the conclusion of this period, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, based on the report presented by the intervener appointed for that purpose, will determine the declaration of revocation or, as the case may be, will sign a duly guaranteed agreement with the concessionaire, in which the measures that the concessionaire must adopt to continue providing the concessioned services will be established.

When a judicial or extrajudicial action, initiated by creditors of a concessionaire, puts the normal provision of services at risk, they must request the preventive intervention from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, in accordance with the procedure and term established in the first paragraph of this article and its regulation, and the assets affected by the Concession may not be seized.

ARTICLE 39. POWERS OF THE PREVENTIVE INTERVENER
The preventive intervener will have the following powers:
a) To establish the measures that the EPSA must adopt to guarantee the normal provision of the service,
b) To monitor the conservation of the EPSA's assets and ensure that these assets do not suffer deterioration,
c) To verify income and expenses,
d) To report immediately to the Superintendent of Basic Sanitation any irregularity noted in the administration, and
e) To report periodically to the Superintendent of Basic Sanitation on the progress of their assignment.

The Superintendent of Basic Sanitation will limit the functions of the preventive intervener to what is essential and, depending on the circumstances, may order that they act exclusively in the collection of debts, without any interference in the administration.

ARTICLE 40. EFFECTS OF THE PREVENTIVE INTERVENTION RESOLUTION
The preventive intervention resolution will produce the following effects:
a) It does not release the intervened service provider from responsibility in the fulfillment of its obligations, contracts, and commitments, and
b) The preventive intervener will exercise their functions with the powers indicated in the previous article and those assigned to them by the Superintendent of Basic Sanitation.

ARTICLE 41. LIFTING OF THE PREVENTIVE INTERVENTION
At least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the preventive intervention period or at the time the preventive intervener deems appropriate, they will present to the Superintendent of Basic Sanitation a report of conclusions and recommendations.

Based on the report of the preventive intervener, the Superintendent may lift the preventive intervention or order the opening of the revocation procedure, or sign a duly guaranteed agreement, in which the measures that the EPSA must adopt to guarantee the normal provision of the service and continue exercising the Concession will be established.

ARTICLE 42. LIMITATIONS ON THE POWERS OF THE PREVENTIVE INTERVENER
The preventive intervener will not have powers of administration or disposal of the assets of the service provider. They cannot be sued, nor will they have any responsibility for the management of the Holder.

ARTICLE 43. DECLARATION OF REVOCATION
For any of the grounds indicated in article 36 of this Law, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, in a public procedure and by means of a duly founded administrative resolution, will declare the revocation and, if necessary, will order the intervention with full powers of administration, while the bidding, awarding, and possession of a new Holder takes place, in order to ensure the continuity of the service.

When all the respective instances have been executed, subject to the provisions of Law No. 1600, Law of the Sectoral Regulation System, of October 28, 1994, the revocation will determine the immediate cessation of the rights of the Holder, established by Law and the respective contract, except that with respect to Basic Sanitation, it will execute the respective guarantees.

The creditors of the Holder of the effectively revoked Concession may not oppose, for any reason, the aforementioned bidding.

CHAPTER III
LICENSES AND REGISTRIES

ARTICLE 44. PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING LICENSES
Licenses will be granted by Administrative Resolution by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation to the EPSAs or to the Municipal Governments that provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services directly, in Non-Concession Zones and in Concession Zones in accordance with what is established in article 34 of this Law.

The municipal government or the EPSA must submit a written request to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, so that it can be adapted to the provision of the Potable Water Service, the Sanitary Sewerage Service, or both. The requirements for granting Licenses will be established by regulation.

The License will be valid for the useful life of the service and when it reaches the maximum period of 40 years established in the Political Constitution of the State, it will be renewed upon the sole verification by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation of the adequate provision of the potable water and sanitary sewerage services. For this purpose, upon receiving the request, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation must rule within a period of thirty (30) days, otherwise the license will be considered renewed under the principle of positive administrative silence.

ARTICLE 45. FREE ASSOCIATION
The License granted by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation to the Municipal Governments or the EPSAs allows them to associate or enter into agreements between license holders or with the holder of the adjacent concession.

ARTICLE 46. OBJECT OF THE LICENSES
The license, in addition to providing legal security to the social organizations that hold it, will have the fundamental purpose that the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, with the collaboration of the municipality when it is not the direct provider, can ensure the principles indicated in articles 25 and 54 of this Law and can prepare the technical opinion referred to in articles 26 and 62 of this Law. In addition, the License will be a requirement to access government projects and programs in the sector.

ARTICLE 47. LICENSE FOR THE PROVISION OF POTABLE WATER SERVICES AND AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE AND APPROPRIATION OF WATER RESOURCES
The license for the provision of the potable water and sewerage service and the authorization for the use and appropriation of water resources for said purpose will be granted by a joint resolution of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation and the competent authority for the water resource, in accordance with the procedure established in article 44 of this Law.

The EPSAs and the Municipal Governments that provide Potable Water Services at the date of promulgation of this Law will have a preferential right for the authorization of the use and appropriation of the specific sources of the Water Resource they use in the provision of the Service.

ARTICLE 48. OBLIGATIONS OF THE LICENSE HOLDER
The license holders have the following obligations:
a) To guarantee the provision in adequate quantity and quality in accordance with current regulations.
b) To guarantee the physical integrity and health of its inhabitants through standards of design, construction, good construction practices, and operations of the potable water and sewerage systems.
c) To comply with environmental standards.

Repeated non-compliance with the indicated obligations will lead to the revocation of the license according to regulation.

ARTICLE 49. OBJECT OF THE REGISTRY
The potable water and sanitary sewerage services belonging to the indigenous and native peoples, the peasant communities, the associations, organizations, and peasant unions that operate according to uses and customs will be subject to Registry. The registry with the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation or with the institution delegated by it, guarantees the legal security of its holders and will be valid for the useful life of the service. The registry will be carried out collectively, free of charge, and expeditiously, not admitting natural persons individually. Said registry will be a requirement to access government projects and programs in the sector.

ARTICLE 50. WATER SOURCE
The use and appropriation of water sources for the provision of potable water services by the indigenous and native peoples, the peasant communities, the associations, organizations, and peasant unions are recognized, respected, and protected according to article 171 of the Political Constitution of the State. The competent authority for the Water Resource will grant a legal document that guarantees said rights, ensuring the rational use of the water resource.

TITLE V
SINGLE CHAPTER: ROSTER OF SERVICES

ARTICLE 51. NATIONAL ROSTER OF BASIC SANITATION SERVICE PROVIDERS
The National Roster of Basic Sanitation Service Providers is created, under the responsibility of the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services. All providers of Basic Sanitation Services, regardless of their form of organization, are obliged to register, free of charge.

ARTICLE 52. OBLIGATION TO PROVIDE INFORMATION
The departmental prefectures, the municipal governments, the National Institute of Cooperatives, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, and the National Institute of Statistics, each within their jurisdiction, are obliged to provide information related to Basic Sanitation Services to the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services, in accordance with regulations.

TITLE VI
RATES, TARIFFS, AND PRICES

CHAPTER I
TARIFF PRINCIPLES, RATES, QUOTAS, AND PROMOTION

ARTICLE 53. TARIFFS
The tariff regime will be guided by the principles of economic efficiency, neutrality, solidarity, redistribution, financial sufficiency, simplicity, and transparency.
a) By economic efficiency it is understood: i) that the Tariffs may not pass on to the Users the costs of an inefficient management, nor allow the companies to appropriate profits from anti-competitive practices, but rather they will approximate the prices corresponding to a competitive market, taking into account anticipated productivity increases, and ii) that the tariff structure will communicate to the Users the scarcity of the Potable Water resource and in this way will provide incentives for its efficient use.
b) By neutrality it is understood that each User will have the right to the same tariff treatment as any other User in the same tariff category.
c) By solidarity it is understood that the costs are redistributed through the tariff structure, so that the tariff takes into account the payment capacity of the users, in the terms of article 55 of this Law.
d) By financial sufficiency it is understood that the Tariff formulas will guarantee the recovery of the operating costs and expenses, including expansion, replacement, and maintenance, will allow for the remuneration of the shareholders' equity in the same way that an efficient company in a sector of comparable risk would have remunerated it, and will allow for the use of technologies and administrative systems that guarantee the best quality, continuity, and security to the Users.
e) By simplicity it is understood that the tariff formulas will be elaborated in such a way as to facilitate their comprehension, application, and control.
f) By transparency it is understood that the tariff regime will be explicit and completely public for all parties involved in the service, including the users.

ARTICLE 54. RATES, TARIFFS, AND QUOTAS FOR LICENSES
The principles that govern (the approval is suppressed) the Rates, Tariffs, or quotas of the holders of licenses and registries are:
a) Total recovery of operation and maintenance costs.
b) Recovery of repair costs that guarantee the sustainability of the services,
c) Ensuring the lowest cost to the Users, safeguarding the security and continuity of the service.
d) Neutrality, simplicity, and transparency, as defined in the previous article.
e) Return on investments made with loans, without remunerating the capital from donations, subsidies, or non-reimbursable contributions.

ARTICLE 55. SOLIDARITY
In the definition of the tariff structure, when there is a clear justification in terms of the principles of solidarity and there is no harm to economic efficiency, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation will allow the tariff structure of the EPSAs to incorporate differentiated tariffs between groups of users, except between those who have metering and those who do not.

ARTICLE 56. FINANCING WITH PUBLIC INVESTMENT
In those deprived areas where the payment capacity does not cover the cost recovery of the investments included in the calculated tariffs or rates, the Public Investment Budget may incorporate investments for the expansion of services and for new connections. For this, it will be necessary for the providers of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services to meet one of the following requirements at the time of making their request:
a) To have a License granted by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation and to have reached the expansion and management goals.
b) To have a registry.

In addition, the State may partially cover the costs of accessing a basic quota of potable water consumption for poor users.

CHAPTER II
RATES, TARIFFS, AND PRICES

ARTICLE 57. APPROVAL OF PRICES AND TARIFFS
The Prices and Tariffs of the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services will be approved by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, upon knowing the technically founded opinion of the Municipal Government, which in turn will consult with the instances of Popular Participation established by article 150, paragraph II) of the Law of Municipalities.

The opinion must be issued within a period not exceeding 90 days; if it is not, the procedure established by the regulation will continue. In the case of cooperatives, the technically founded opinion of the Municipal Government will not be required.

ARTICLE 58. FORMULATION OF INDEXATION
The indexation formulas for rates, tariffs, and prices for the holders of concessions must include:
a) A component that reflects the adjustment for variations in the company's costs, based on variations in the price index that directly affect the sector,
b) A component that transfers the variations in the regulation fee,
c) Compensation variables for the lower consumption categories according to regulation.

ARTICLE 59. TARIFF STUDIES
The review and approval of Tariffs will be carried out on the basis of studies that will be conducted by the concession holder, based on the terms of reference provided by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, which will approve or reject the studies carried out, by means of a duly founded administrative resolution, formulating the observations it deems pertinent.

The tariffs and tariff indexation formulas will have a duration of five (5) years and will be applied on the basis of the tariff studies presented to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, the evaluation of the investments, the fulfillment of goals, and the increase in efficiency by the EPSA. As long as the new Tariffs and indexation formulas for the following period are not approved, the previous tariffs and formulas will remain in force.

ARTICLE 60. COLLECTION OF TARIFFS
The concession holder will charge Tariffs to the Users, as retribution for the Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services. The payment of these Tariffs by the Users is mandatory. In the areas located within the Concession area that do not have domestic connections for Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage, the EPSAs may charge Tariffs for the provision of alternative services.

ARTICLE 61. PRICES
The concession holders may charge Prices to the Users for the services of connection, replacement, installation of meters, and other operational services whose prices must be sufficiently justified, with prior express authorization from the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation and in accordance with the criteria that will be established in the Regulations for the Provision of Services and for Rates, Tariffs, and Prices.

ARTICLE 62. DETERMINATION OF RATES
When the Potable Water Services or the Sanitary Sewerage Services are provided directly by a municipal government, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation will submit to the Ministry of Finance a recommendation on the level of the water Rate, so that this Ministry may submit the technical opinion to the National Senate, in accordance with the powers granted by Law to the Municipalities.

TITLE VII
SINGLE CHAPTER
USE OF PUBLIC GOODS, EASEMENTS, AND EXPROPRIATION

ARTICLE 63. PUBLIC USE GOODS
The EPSAs, subject to the provisions on easements contained in the Civil Code, this Law, and those specified by regulation, have the right to use, free of charge, the soil, subsoil, air, roads, streets, squares, and other public use goods, as required to fulfill the object of the Concession, as well as to cross rivers, bridges, and railways. When dealing with the use of the subsoil in areas of public use goods, the affected works must be replaced within the period fixed in the schedule.

ARTICLE 64. EASEMENT
The exercise of activities related to the provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services confers on the EPSAs the right to obtain the necessary easements for the fulfillment of their objectives. At the request of the Holder of the Concession, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation may impose easements for the object of the Concession, on private property or on property that is part of the patrimonial domain of any public or autonomous entity. Easements for holders of Licenses and Registries will be resolved according to uses and customs, the Civil Code, and the Law of Municipalities. The exercise of the easements will be carried out causing the least prejudice to those on whom they are imposed. The imposition of easements will respect the cultural heritage of the nation and the regulations of the respective municipal jurisdictions in matters of urbanism. The requirements for obtaining easements will be established by regulation.

ARTICLE 65. EXPROPRIATION
The provider of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services that does not reach an agreement with the owner of the land on the use, appropriation, price, or extension of the necessary land for the realization of works or installations, for the provision of the services, may request the expropriation of the surfaces it requires, within the framework of the procedures established by Law.

ARTICLE 66. INDEMNIFICATION
When the imposition of easements generates a dismemberment of the ownership right or deprives of the right of property, it will be considered as expropriation and will proceed according to the legal norms in force on the matter.

TITLE VIII
SINGLE CHAPTER OF INFRACTIONS AND SANCTIONS

ARTICLE 67. INFRACTIONS
Contraventions of the provisions of this Law and its regulations, as long as they do not constitute a crime, are considered infractions.

ARTICLE 68. TIPIFICATION OF CONDUCTS
The regulations of this Law will typify the conducts of the service providers, the Users, and third parties that are the object of infraction. The Regulation of Infractions and Sanctions must establish the sanctions, as well as their form of application and compliance.

ARTICLE 69. INFRACTIONS OF CONCESSION HOLDERS
The infractions committed by the Holders of the Concession will be sanctioned by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, according to the seriousness of the fault, subject to the provisions of the regulation and the respective contracts. The imposition of sanctions on the Users will be established according to the regulation.

ARTICLE 70. INFRACTIONS OF THIRD PARTIES
The infractions committed by third parties will be sanctioned by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, according to their seriousness and subject to the provisions of the regulations and without prejudice to compensating for the damages caused.

ARTICLE 71. INFRACTIONS OF USERS
Without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by the Penal Code and the right of the Holder of the Concession to charge for any arbitrary, unmetered, or clandestine consumption, the Holder of the Concession will sanction the infractions of the Users in the following cases:
a) Arbitrary connection,
b) Alteration of measuring instruments,
c) Clandestine consumption, and
d) Denying access to the property for inspections by authorized personnel of the Holder of the Concession.

The Superintendency of Basic Sanitation will regulate the sanctions for Users. The sanctions imposed by the Holder of the Concession will be according to their seriousness and subject to what is established in the regulation.

ARTICLE 72. DESTINATION OF FINES
The amount of the fines collected by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation from the Holders of the Concession will be transferred to the Municipalities where they are generated, and must be allocated to the financing of Basic Sanitation projects in their most deprived areas.

ARTICLE 73. SERVICE DISCONNECTION
The providers of Potable Water Services may not apply the disconnection of the Service as a sanction to the User, except:
a) When there is a debt for a period longer than the limit permitted by the Regulation,
b) In case of leaks that cause waste of Potable Water from the public network, cause damage to third parties, or put others' property at risk,
c) Non-compliance with the provisions of article 14 of the Regulation on Water Pollution, approved by Supreme Decree No. 24176, of December 8, 1995,
d) By order of the competent judicial authority,
e) or any other case provided for in the Regulations of this Law.

ARTICLE 74. INVOICES
After the period established in article 73, subsection a), the outstanding invoices for the payment of the provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services issued by the providers of these services will be executed according to the provisions of the Civil Code and the Civil Procedure Code.

TITLE IX
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF USERS

ARTICLE 75. RIGHTS OF USERS
Users who are legally connected to the Potable Water Service or the Sanitary Sewerage Service have the following rights:
a) To receive Potable Water in adequate quantity and quality, continuously, in accordance with current norms,
b) To request the measurement and verification of their consumption,
c) To request the verification of non-visible leaks within their installations by the service provider,
d) To complain about unjustified charges, poor attention, or negligence of the service provider, and in their case, to appeal to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation,
e) To demand the proper functioning of the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services on a continuous basis,
f) Those established in the organic statute of the service provider, when applicable.
g) To receive notifications, in case of arrears, before the corresponding disconnection is made, in accordance with article 73, subsection a) of this Law,
h) To receive permanent protection of their rights by the Superintendency of the sector.
i) To receive compensation for damages caused in circumstances of negligence, incompetence, or carelessness in the provision of the service, under the responsibility of the EPSA, in accordance with the characteristics of the damage and as qualified by the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.
j) To demand that the connections and domestic service lines for water and sewerage that suffer defects be repaired by the EPSAs, except in the case that they are caused by the user or by third parties.

ARTICLE 76. CONNECTION AND CONTRACTING OF SERVICES
The owners or occupants of built-on, non-built-on, domestic, commercial, industrial, or mining properties of the public or private sector that have the corresponding infrastructure are obliged to contract and connect to the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services, in the places where concession contracts exist for the provision of said services. They must cancel the current Tariffs for the Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services.

In exceptional cases, provided that it does not violate the principles established in article 5 of this Law, when there is water availability according to a report from the competent Water Resource Authority and with the approval of the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, a special treatment will be permitted for industrial, mining, or agricultural Users who self-supply for productive purposes, and they must connect to the sanitary sewerage network when it exists and comply with the current regulations regarding the quality of discharges to the sanitary sewerage.

ARTICLE 77. RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS IN COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
The communities, through their Grassroots Territorial Organizations or other forms of association recognized by law, have the following rights and obligations referred to the provision of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services:
a) To participate actively in the management of the services and contribute to their provision, after complying with the requirements demanded by law;
b) To demand the correct provision of the services and to report their deficiencies or irregularities to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation,
c) To manage before the municipal government the provision of services in Non-Concession Zones that do not have them;
d) To participate in sanitary education programs and to inform the community about their rights and obligations in matters of basic sanitation.

TITLE X
SINGLE CHAPTER: FINAL AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 78. REGULARIZATION OF EXISTING SERVICES
From the promulgation of this Law, the legal persons, public, private, or Cooperatives that provide Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services must obtain or adapt their Concessions or Licenses before the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation, within a period that will be defined by said Superintendency for each entity and which may not exceed twelve months for Concessions and twenty-four months for Licenses and Registries. Industrial, mining, and agricultural Users within the area to be concessioned, who self-supply water for productive purposes, must regularize their situation with the competent Water Resource Authority, and must connect to the potable water and sanitary sewerage network when they exist and comply with the current regulations regarding the quality of discharges to the sanitary sewerage.

ARTICLE 79. BIDDING OF INADEQUATE SERVICES
If, after the period indicated in the previous article has elapsed, the current providers of Potable Water or Sanitary Sewerage Services in Concession Zones have not obtained the right of Concession, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation will proceed with their intervention and will call for a public bid to grant the Services in Concession.

ARTICLE 80. NEW WATER ABSTRACTIONS
From the promulgation of this Law, the drilling of wells or other forms of water abstraction will not be permitted without the due authorization from the competent authority for the water resource or the institution delegated by it.

If a sanitary sewerage network exists, the natural or legal person who has obtained the respective authorization for the abstraction of water is obliged to connect to the sanitary sewerage, and must comply with the current regulations regarding the quality of discharges to the sanitary sewerage.

ARTICLE 81. OVERSIGHT OF THE SUPERINTENDENCY OF BASIC SANITATION
Article 2 of Law No. 1600, Law of the Sectoral Regulation System (SIRESE), of October 28, 1994, is modified with the following text:
“The Sectoral Regulation System (SIRESE) is governed by the General Superintendency and the Sectoral Superintendencies, in accordance with the provisions of this law and other legal sectoral norms, and will have their main domicile in the city of La Paz.
SIRESE, as part of the Executive Branch, is under the oversight of the Ministry of Economic Development and the Ministry of Housing and Basic Services in what refers to the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation.
The General Superintendency and the Sectoral Superintendencies, as autarchic bodies, are legal persons of public law, with national jurisdiction, and autonomy in technical, administrative, and economic management.”

ARTICLE 82. COMPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
The Executive Branch will issue, at a minimum, the following regulations to this Law:
a) Regulation of Concessions and Licenses, b) Regulation of Service Provision,
c) Regulation of Prices, Rates, and Tariffs,
d) Regulation of the Use of Public Goods, Easements, and e) Regulation of Infractions and Sanctions of the Services.
The Executive Branch may promulgate other complementary regulations and norms.

ARTICLE 83. CURRENT PROVISIONS
Until the provisions in the previous article are promulgated, the following current provisions will be applicable, as long as they are not contrary to this Law:
a) Regulation of the Institutional Organization and of the Concessions of the Water Sector, approved by Supreme Decree No. 24716 of July 22, 1997.
b) Regulation for the Use of Public Domain Goods and Constitution of Easements for Water Services, approved by Supreme Decree No. 24716 of July 22, 1997.
c) National Regulation for the Provision of Potable Water and Sanitary Sewerage Services for Urban Centers, approved by Resolution No. 510 of the Ministry of Urban Affairs, on October 29, 1992.
d) Tariff Policy for Potable Water, Sanitary Sewerage, and Sanitation Systems for Rural and Urban Populations of Bolivia, approved by Resolution No. 419 of the Ministry of Urban Affairs, on July 6, 1993.
e) National Regulation of Domiciliary Sanitary Installations, approved by Secretarial Resolution No. 390 of the National Secretariat of Urban Affairs, on September 20, 1994.
f) Regulation on Water Pollution, approved by Supreme Decree No. 24176, of December 8, 1995.
g) Regulation on the Discharge of Industrial Wastes into Bodies of Water, approved by Ministerial Resolution No. 010/85 of the Ministry of Urbanism and Housing, on January 24, 1985.

ARTICLE 84. REPEALS
All provisions contrary to this Law are repealed.

TRANSITORY ARTICLE. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE AND APPROPRIATION OF THE WATER RESOURCE.
The authorizations for the use and appropriation of the water resource destined for the potable water service, as well as their revocation, will be granted by the competent authority for the water resource. Until this is created, through the Law that regulates the water resource, the Superintendency of Basic Sanitation will fulfill said function.

All authorizations for the appropriation of other uses, until the Law that regulates the Water Resource is approved, will be approved by Law.

Pass to the Executive Branch, for constitutional purposes.

Given in the Session Hall of the Honorable National Congress, on the eleventh day of the month of April of the year two thousand.

Therefore, I promulgate it so that it may be held and complied with as a Law of the Republic.

Government Palace of the city of La Paz, on the eleventh day of the month of April of the year two thousand.