

--- PAGE 1 ---

Law on Water Resources Management of the Kingdom of Cambodia 
 
 
 
 
Entry into force on 29 June 2007.  
 
  LAW 
 ON  
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT  
OF THE KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I  
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
 
Article 1 
 
The general purpose of this Law is to foster the effective and sustainable management of the water resources of 
the Kingdom of Cambodia to attain socio-economic development and the welfare of the people. 
 
This Law determines:  
 
- 
the rights and obligations of water users,  
- 
the fundamental principles of water resources management, and  
- 
the participation of users and their associations in the sustainable development of water resources. 
 
Article 2 
 
In this Law, the following technical terms shall be understood: 
 
"water" means surface, underground and atmospheric water; 
 
“Water resources” means sea, river, tributary, stream, water falls, canal, lake and swamp, pond, reservoirs 
or storage. 
 
"groundwater" means water flowing within a saturated soil, rock medium, fractures or other cavities within 
the ground; 
 
"aquifer" means a geological formation where underground water accumulates permanently;  
 
"basin" means a geographical area determined by the watershed limits of the system of waters, including 
surface and underground waters; 
 
"sub-basin" means part of a basin; 
 
 
"international rivers" means rivers geographically situated in the territory of two or more states; 
 
"banks" of a river, tributary, stream, canal, lake and reservoir shall mean the land normally inundated 
by the water contained in such river, tributary, stream, canal, lake or reservoir, together with such soil, rock 
or any other material immediately adjacent thereto, but does not include any land beyond that land, soil, rock 
or other materials, which is occasionally inundated by such water; 
 
"shore" of sea, river, tributaries means the land covered with sand or soil, and declining towards the water 
in a body of water, occasionally inundated by such water; 
 


--- PAGE 2 ---

 
 
 
 
2
"beds" of river, tributary, stream, canal, lake and reservoir means the portion of land delimited by their 
respective banks, and normally covered by water; 
 
"public purpose" refers to urban and rural water supply, food production, hydro-power generation, navigation, 
industrial development and the maintenance of minimum flows for ecological, cultural and religious purposes 
and the preservation of aquatic life; 
 
"waterworks" means large and minor dams, weirs, diversion canals, dykes/embankments, large and minor 
drainage systems, irrigation system, large and small reservoirs, aqua-ducts/ conduits , wells and boreholes, 
hydropower dams and such other structures or installations as are constructed or used for the purpose of 
diverting, storing, conveying and abstracting, using, conserving and protecting water resources, for drainage 
purposes of inundated areas, or for the prevention and mitigation of the effects of floods and of other water-
related emergency situations.  
 
"licence" means the permit document which confers to a person the right to use water and water resources; 
 
"person" means any physical or juridical person, whether private or public; 
 
 
Article 3 
 
All water and water resources are owned by the State. 
 
Article 4 
 
Water and water resources shall be managed and developed based on an integrated water resources 
management (IWRM). 
 
The IWRM shall take into account: 
 
all aspects of water resources; 
 
linkages between water resources and other components of the natural environment; 
 
requirement for an effective and sustainable water use for human being, environment and other 
sectors. 
 
The implementation of the IWRM shall be carried out jointly and within a cooperation framework of all 
relevant agencies, 
 
Article 5 
 
 The MOWRAM is mandated to manage, lead and supervise the implementation of the present law. The 
MOWRAM shall conduct consultation with other concerned ministries. In case of need, the Royal 
Government of Cambodia shall set up a joint commission for addressing and coordinating works and 
activities among the Ministries concerned. 
 
 may declare any basin, sub-basin or aquifer as Water Law Implementation Area when within that basin, sub-
basin ,ground water or aquifer there are likely to be conflicts among water users, problems of water pollution 
or watershed degradation. 
 
Article 6 
 
In implementing the Law on Water Resources Management, the MOWRAM  shall develop the policy on the 
water resources management, conservation and development taking into account the specific requirements 
and demand of each zone/region in the Kingdom of Cambodia to ensure the sustainability of the water 
resources and the effectiveness of water utilization to prevent the disaster and conflicts.  
 
The zoning for the water resources management shall be provided for by the government sub-decrees. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

 
 
 
 
3
 
Article 7 
 
The Royal Government of Cambodia shall encourage the collaboration with and participation of the relevant 
agencies, private sectors, beneficiary groups, NGOs and International Organizations in all activities related 
to the management, investment, exploitation, conservation and development of the water resources. 
 
   
CHAPTER II  
 
WATER RESOURCES INVENTORY AND PLANNING 
 
 
Article 8 
 
The MOWRAM shall keep a centralized inventory of the water resources of The Kingdom of Cambodia. This 
inventory shall indicate the location, quantity and quality of the resources during the year, each year. 
 
Data on quantity and quality, and any other water-related information collected by other institutions, whether at 
the national, provincial or district level, shall be submitted to the MOWRAM in a technically standardized 
format. 
 
The above data and information may be provided free of charge to all government agencies and other 
communities for the public interests, except for those classified as confidential. The MOWRAM may require the 
payment for the data fee by the data request for commercial purpose. 
 
Article 9 
 
The MOWRAM shall be responsible for preparing a national water resources plan. 
  
Water resources projects shall be prepared based on the data and information containing in the water resources 
inventory, in accordance with the national water resources plan, the economic development plan and the national 
and regional environmental plans, to ensure proper balance between water availability and the present and 
foreseeable demands. 
 
 
Article 10 
 
The MOWRAM is mandated to manage the river basin, sub-basins, watershed run-off, groundwater and aquifers 
in collaboration with all concerned Ministries. 
 
Procedures for development and implementation of the plan of the management, conservation and development 
of the river basin, sub-basins, watershed run-off, ground water and aquifers shall be regulated by the government 
sub-decrees.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER III  
 
WATER RESOURCES USE AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Article 11 
 
Every person has the right to use water resources for his/her vital human need including drinking, washing, 
bathing and other domestic purposes including watering for animal husbandry, fishing and the irrigation of 


--- PAGE 4 ---

 
 
 
 
4
domestic gardens and orchards, in a manner that will not affect other legal right of others. amount not exceeding 
that necessary to  
 
The fore-mentioned uses are not subject to the licensing.  
 
Article 12 
 
The diversion, abstraction and use of water resources for purposes other than those mentioned in Article 11, and 
the construction of the waterworks relating thereto, are subject to a license or permit. 
 
The formality for license application shall be provided for by the Government sub-decree.  
 
The extraction of sand, soil, stones, gravel, petroleum and gas from the beds and banks of watercourses, lakes, 
canals and reservoirs is also subject to licensing. The technical hydrological formality shall be detailed in the 
Government sub-decree. .  
 
The filling of river, tributary, stream, natural lakes, canal, and reservoirs shall subject to license or written 
authorization. Its formality shall be provided for in the Government sub-decree. 
 
The diversion of water from the Kingdom of Cambodia territory shall be permitted and agreed by the Royal 
Government of Cambodia with due ratification by the legislative  bodies. 
 
 
Article 13 
  
The conditions, modalities and procedures for granting, transfer, cancellation, time limitation, extension, 
suspension of water use licences shall be determined by the Government sub-decree. 
 
The water use fee under the water use license shall be determined by the Government sub-decree. 
   
Article 14 
 
Prior to granting water use license to any person, the MOWRAM shall consult with the other agencies and 
the local authorities concerned on the water utilisation and the construction of waterworks proposed by the 
applicant. 
 
Article 15  
 
Water use licensee may transfer his/her its water use right totally or partially to another user, after securing 
prior approval of the MOWRAM. 
 
Article 16 
 
The Royal Government of Cambodia may introduce amendment to the license in the public interest. In such 
case, the licensee shall receive a proper compensation.   
 
Article 17 
 
The MOWRAM A may amend or cancel a license at the request of the licence holder. 
 
The MOWRAM may modify, suspend or cancel water use license in the following cases: 
   
- 
violation of the conditions imposed in a licence; 
- 
violation of the provisions of this Law and other norms adopted thereunder; 
- 
Over-use of water in a quantity exceeding the amount permitted 
- 
use of the water for purposes other than those authorized; 


--- PAGE 5 ---

 
 
 
 
5
- 
non use of the water for a period of two consecutive years after the license was issued; 
- 
transfer of the licence without prior approval; 
- 
causing negative impact on public health or the environment; 
- 
refusal, without justification, to pay water fee. 
 
In such case, the license holder shall present a written statement to the MOWRAM to explain the reasons of 
his/her actions or omission. 
 
The MOWRAM shall determine the time frame for the compensation, by the licence holder, of any damage 
that may be produced as a result of the above wrong-doing. 
 
Article 18 
 
The license holder has the right to appeal to the Head of MOWRAM against the decision of its relevant official 
within thirty days from such decision is made. The complaint must specify the reasons for the appeal.  
 
In case of his/her disagreement with the Head of MOWRAM decision, the license holder has the right to lodge 
complaints against that decision with the competent court. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Farmer water user community 
 
 
Article 19 
 
To ensure effective and sustainable management and operation of the irrigation system, the MOWRAM shall 
initiate the creation of Farmers' Water User Communities.  
 
All farmers using water from the same irrigation system or part thereof may form a Farmers' Water User 
Community. 
 
The statutes of the Farmers' Water User Community shall be registered in the Farmers Water User Community 
registry with the provincial or municipal directorate of the MOWRAM. After its registration, the Farmers Water 
User Community is fully entitled to carry out its Statutes and formally recognized.  
 
The procedures for the establishment and dissolution of Farmers' Water User Communities shall be determined 
by The government sub-decree. 
 
 
 
 
  CHAPTER V  
 
GROUNDWATER 
 
Article 20 
  
Any person carries out drilling or digging of the wells for the professional or commercial purposes shall supply the 
MOWRAM with a detailed report on the drilling or digging operation, the technical specifications and other 
information.  
 
The utilization of the ground-waters and aquifers for the professional or commercial purposes the quantity of 
which exceed the level as defined in Article 11 shall be subject to licensing. The no-drilling or digging zones 
shall be defined in the Government Sub Decreee. 


--- PAGE 6 ---

 
 
 
 
6
 
 
Article 21 
 
Any person who discovers groundwater and aquifer in the course of mining, or other activities, shall report to the 
MOWRAM. 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
Article 22  
 
The discharge, disposal or deposit of polluting substances which are likely to deteriorate the quality of water and 
to endanger human, animal and plant health shall be subject to water  license or authorization. 
 
The fore-mentioned polluting substances and the technical standards for handling them shall be determined by 
the Government Sub Decree. 
 
In performing this Article, the MOWRAM shall consult with the concerned ministries. 
 
Article 23 
 
The MOWRAM may declare contingency or protected "water use" zones in the following cases: 
 
- 
when surface or underground water sources seriously affect their quantity, quality or ecological balance;  
- 
when watershed is degraded by human activities or natural cause;  
- 
When water is hazardous to the people health.  
 
The geographical scope of such zones shall be established on a case-by-case basis by way of the MOWRAM 
regulations.  
 
 
CHAPTER VII  
 
FLOOD CONTROL 
 
 
Article 24  
 
In the purpose of the flood protection, the MOWRAM, in collaboration with the other agencies concerned, may 
designate any floodplain area as Flood Retention Area.  
 
Within a Flood Control Area, the MOWRAM, together with other agencies and local authorities concerned, shall 
develop plan on measures for flood prevention and mitigation to ensure the safety to the human life, animals and 
property.  
 
The MOWRAM may suspend temporary activities that damage flood protection works or  obstruct the natural 
flow of water. 
 
Article 25  
 


--- PAGE 7 ---

 
 
 
 
7
In the case of finding that any water-work is unstable or may cause disastrous impact on the society, the 
MOWRAM shall consult with other Ministries concerned and local authorities, to take appropriate actions 
within their respective mandates. 
 
Article 26  
 
In the event of floods and draughts, the MOWRAM shall serve as Headquarters of the Royal Government of 
Cambodia in the execution of the required actions in close collaboration with the Ministries concerned and local 
authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  CHAPTER VIII  
 
SERVITUDES 
 
Article 27 
 
The owner or occupier of upstream land is entitled to collect and use rain-water and the water flowing over 
his/his property for the purposes enumerated in Article 11 of the present Law, in such a manner that it will 
not affect the legitimate interest of the downstream users. 
 
The owner or occupier of downstream land is entitled to collect and use rain-water and the water flowing 
over his/his property from the upstream, but he/she shall not hinder the natural flow of the water by 
constructing road, large or small dykes or other structures for storing water, unless there is appropriate 
authorization. 
 
The damage caused a land owner or occupier as a result of the violation of the provisions of this Article shall be 
subject to compensation.  
 
Article 28 
 
The owners or occupiers of agricultural land shall allow the water flowing over his/her land naturally to 
neighboring owners or occupiers land to meet their irrigation and other needs. 
 
Article 29 
 
Servitude for the public interest constitutes a special provision that shall be complied with by the owners or 
occupiers of land. 
 
The holder of servitude for the passage of water through neighboring land by means of underground or surface 
conduits, shall not affect the legitimate interest of others. The same servitude may be obtained, at the same 
conditions, for the disposal of wastewater, sewage water and drainage water. 
 
In the case of damage, the beneficiary of the servitude under this Article shall be liable to pay compensation to 
the affected owner or occupier of the land.  
 
Article 30 
 
The owner or occupier of neighboring land is entitled to use the works provided for in Article 29 of the present 
law. 
 
In such case, they are required to contribute proportionally to their utilization of the works, to the cost of 
construction, operation and maintenance of those works, and costs relating to their necessary modifications. 
 


--- PAGE 8 ---

 
 
 
 
8
Article 31 
 
Servitude shall cease to exist as provided for in the provision on Servitudes in the Land Administration Law 
 
Article 32 
 
All disputes relating to the establishment and operation of servitude in water use shall be mediated by the 
MOWRAM, and other Ministries concerned and Local Authorities.  
 
Article 33 
 
Any competent officer of the MOWRAM tasked to conduct technical survey and monitoring of matters 
related to water utilization, is entitled to enter any privately owned land upon prior written notice to the 
owner or occupier of the land. 
 
During his/her mission, the officer shall posses the letter of authorization. 
 
 
CHAPTER IX  
 
INTERNATIONAL RIVERS 
 
 
Article 34 
 
The Kingdom of Cambodia has the right and duty to participate in the utilization, development and 
management of an equitable and reasonable share of the international river basins in its territory, consistent 
with the obligations arising from the international agreements to which Cambodia is a Party. 
 
The MOWRAM shall pay particular attention to the optimum and effective use of the Mekong River Basin 
in all fields including the navigation and transport, consistent with the governing principles of the CNMC.  
 
CHAPTER X 
 
INCENTIVES AND PENALTIES 
 
Article 35  
 
The Royal Government may grant a reward or incentives to those who engage in research on, or the 
development of, new technologies, installations of modern equipment, that will contribute to the reduction of 
waste and improvement in water quality, and increase water use efficiency.  
 
The criteria and modalities for the granting of rewards or incentives shall be defined by the MOWRAM 
regulations. 
 
 
Article 36  
 
The breach of the provisions of the present law shall be punished as follows: 
 
1. by imposing a fine from two hundred thousands (200,000) and two million Riles (2,000,000) on a person who: 
 
- 
Breached the conditions stipulated in the license;  
- 
Obstructed without proper justification, the performance of the duty by the competent officials. 
- 
Constructed the water-works structure without water license; 
 


--- PAGE 9 ---

 
 
 
 
9
2. by imposing a fine from two million Riles (2,000,000)  to five million Riles (5,000,000) on a person who: 
 
- 
Used water without securing water license or authorization as required by Law. 
- 
Dug or drilled wells for exploitation of underground water without securing water license. The amount 
of fine shall be double in case the digging or drilling of wells causes land subsidence or erosion. The 
perpetrator shall be liable for the damage resulting from the land subsidence or erosion. 
 
3.  by imposing a fine from five million Riles (5,000,000) to ten million Riles (10,000,000) and or imprisonment 
from one (01) to five (05) years, on a person who: 
- 
Reclaimed by land fills, the lake, ponds, swamps or reservoir without a licence; 
- 
Discharged polluting wastewater into the water source without a license; 
- 
Committed act of violation in the prohibited zone; 
- 
Obstructed the natural flow of  a river, tributary, stream or canal without a license 
- 
Exploiting sands, soil, gravel and stones from the banks and beds of river, tributary, stream without 
water license  
 
 
In case of repeated offence, the penalty shall be double. 
 
Article 37 
 
Any person that causes damages to the waterworks shall be punished in accordance with the existing Penalty 
Codes. 
 
Article 38 
 
In addition to the provisions in the preceding Articles, the perpetrator shall remove all kinds of works 
constructed in violation of this Law, and to repair and restore the status quo of the sites, and all equipments and 
machinery will be confiscated as the state property.   
 
Article 39 
 
Any official of the MOWRAM who conspires with an offender or aid and abet the commission of an offence, 
shall be punished according to the Law. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER XI 
 
FINAL PROVISIONS 
 
 
Article 40 
 
All legal provisions inconsistent with this Law are hereby repealed. 
 
 
Article 41 
 
This Law is proclaimed as a matter of urgency. 
 
 
Proclaimed by H.M, the King Norodom Sihamony on this day of 29 June 2007 at the Royal Palace, Phnom 
Penh 
 
