DECREE 2811 OF 1974
(December 18)

Regulated by National Decree 1608 of 1978, Partially regulated
by National Decree 1715 of 1978, Partially regulated
by National Decree 704 of 1986, Partially regulated
by National Decree 305 of 1988, Regulated by
National Decree 4688 of 2005, Regulated by National Decree 2372
of 2010

Whereby the National Code of Renewable Natural Resources and Environmental Protection is issued.

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF COLOMBIA,

in exercise of the extraordinary powers conferred by Law 23 of
1973 and following consultation with the commissions designated by the Legislative Chambers and the Council of State, respectively,

<u>See Ministry of Environment Resolution 438 of 2001</u>

DECREES:

The following shall be the text of the National Code of Renewable Natural Resources and Environmental Protection.

PRELIMINARY TITLE

SOLE CHAPTER

Article 1.- The environment is common heritage. The State and private individuals must participate in its preservation and management, which are of public utility and social interest.

The preservation and management of renewable natural resources are also of public utility and social interest. (N.C. Article 30).

Article 2.- Founded on the principle that the environment is the common heritage of humanity and necessary for the survival and the economic and social development of peoples, this Code has the objective of:

1.- Achieving the preservation and restoration of the environment and the conservation, improvement, and rational utilization of renewable natural resources, according to criteria of equity that ensure the harmonious development of man and of said resources, their permanent availability, and the maximum social participation for the benefit of the health and well-being of the present and future inhabitants of the National territory; <u>See National Decree 1541 of 1978</u>

2.- Preventing and controlling the harmful effects of the exploitation of non-renewable natural resources on other resources; <u>See National Decree 1541 of 1978</u>

3.- Regulating human conduct, whether individual or collective, and the activity of the Public Administration with respect to the environment and renewable natural resources, and the relationships that arise from the utilization and conservation of such resources and the environment. <u>See National Decree 1541 of 1978</u>

Article 3.- In accordance with the stated objectives, this Code regulates:

a.- The management of renewable natural resources, namely:

The atmosphere and the National airspace;

Waters in any of their states;

The land, the soil, and the subsoil;

The flora;

The fauna;

Primary sources of non-depletable energy;

Topographical slopes with energy potential;

Geothermal resources;

Biological resources of the waters and of the soil and subsoil of the territorial sea and of the economic zone of continental and insular domain of the Republic;

Landscape resources;

b.- The defense of the environment and of renewable natural resources against the harmful action of natural phenomena.

c.- The other elements and factors that constitute the environment or influence it, denominated in this Code as environmental elements, such as:

Residues, garbage, waste, and refuse;

Noise;

Living conditions resulting from urban or rural human settlement;

Goods produced by man, or whose production is induced or cultivated by him, insofar as they affect or may significantly affect environmental deterioration.

Article 4.- The rights acquired by private parties in accordance with the Law on environmental elements and renewable natural resources are recognized. Regarding their exercise, such rights shall be subject to the provisions of this Code. (N.C. Article 30; Law 153/87, Article 28). Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court, with the understanding that, in accordance with Article 58 of the Constitution, private property over renewable natural resources is subject to all limitations and restrictions derived from the ecological function of property.

Article 5.- This Code is in effect throughout the National territory, the territorial sea with its soil, subsoil, and airspace, the continental shelf, and the economic zone or other maritime spaces in which the country exercises jurisdiction in accordance with international law.

Article 6.- The execution of the environmental policy of this Code shall be the function of the National Government, which may delegate it to sectional Governments or other specialized public entities. (N.C. Article 135).

BOOK ONE - THE ENVIRONMENT

PART I

DEFINITION AND GENERAL NORMS OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

Article 7.- Every person has the right to enjoy a healthy environment.

Article 8.- The following are considered factors that deteriorate the environment, among others:

a.- The contamination of the air, water, soil, and other renewable natural resources.

Contamination is understood as the alteration of the environment with substances or forms of energy introduced into it, by human activity or by nature, in quantities, concentrations, or levels capable of interfering with the well-being and health of people, threatening flora and fauna, degrading the quality of the environment, or of the resources of the nation or of private individuals.

A contaminant is understood as any element, combination of elements, or form of energy that currently or potentially can produce the aforementioned environmental alteration. Contamination can be physical, chemical, or biological;

b.- The degradation, erosion, and waterlogging of soils and lands;

c.- The harmful alterations of topography;

d.- The harmful alterations of the natural flow of waters;

e.- Sedimentation in watercourses and deposits;

f.- Harmful changes in the bed of waters;

g.- The extinction or quantitative or qualitative decrease of animal or plant species or genetic resources.

h.- The introduction and propagation of diseases and pests;

i.- The introduction, utilization, and transport of harmful animal or plant species or products of dangerous substances;

j.- The detrimental or unaesthetic alteration of natural landscapes;

k.- The decrease or extinction of primary natural sources of energy;

l.- The accumulation or inadequate disposal of residues, garbage, waste, and refuse;

m.- Harmful noise;

n.- The inadequate use of dangerous substances;

o.- Eutrophication, that is, the excessive and abnormal growth of flora in lakes and lagoons;

p.- The concentration of urban or rural human population in housing conditions that threaten well-being and health;

Article 9.- The use of environmental elements and renewable natural resources must be carried out in accordance with the following principles: <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

a.- Natural resources and other environmental elements must be used efficiently, to achieve their maximum utilization in accordance with the general interest of the community and with the principles and objectives that guide this Code;

b.- Natural resources and other environmental elements are interdependent. Their utilization shall be done in a way that, as far as possible, they do not interfere with each other;

c.- The utilization of environmental elements or renewable natural resources must be done without harming the general interest of the community, or the rights of third parties;

d.- The diverse uses that a natural resource may have shall be subject to the priorities that are determined and must be carried out in a coordinated manner, so that the principles stated in the preceding ordinals can be fulfilled;

e.- Renewable natural resources may not be used beyond the permissible limits, which, by altering the natural physical, chemical, or biological qualities, cause the depletion or serious deterioration of those resources or disturb the right to subsequent utilization insofar as it is convenient for the public interest;

f.- The planning of the management of renewable natural resources and environmental elements must be done in an integral manner, such that it contributes to the balanced urban and rural development. For the well-being of the community, spaces covered with vegetation shall be established and conserved in urban centers and their surroundings.

PART II

OF ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS OF INTERNATIONAL SCOPE OR INFLUENCE

Article 10.- To prevent or resolve environmental problems and regulate the utilization of renewable natural resources shared with neighboring countries and without prejudice to existing treaties, the Government will seek to supplement existing stipulations or negotiate others that provide for:

a.- The reciprocal and permanent exchange of information necessary for the planning of development and the optimal use of said resources and elements;

b.- Reciprocal and prior communication of environmental alterations or imbalances that may originate from works or projects planned by the Governments or inhabitants of the respective countries, with sufficient advance notice so that said Governments may undertake the pertinent actions when they consider that their environmental rights and interests may be impaired;

c.- The joint administration by the Governments of renewable natural resources whose exploitation or utilization cannot be physically divided between the interested countries, or that from a technical or economic point of view is not convenient to divide;

d.- The adoption of measures so that the purely internal use of non-renewable natural resources or other environmental elements, made in Colombia or in neighboring nations, does not cause significant harm to other countries.

Article 11.- The natural resources subject to the provisions referred to in the preceding article are, among others, the following:

a.- The hydrographic basins of rivers that serve as a boundary or that cross the borders of Colombia, including surface and groundwater and other connected natural watercourses;

b.- The forests on both sides of a border;

c.- The fauna species in which Colombia and neighboring countries have a common interest;

d.- The National maritime waters and the elements they contain;

e.- The atmosphere, insofar as acts already verified or those projected in one country may produce harmful effects in the neighboring country or detrimental climatic alterations;

f.- The geothermal deposits that extend to both sides of a border.

Article 12.- The Government will seek to avoid or will prohibit the utilization of environmental elements and renewable natural resources that may cause environmental deterioration in non-neighboring countries, on the high seas or in its bed, or in the atmosphere or airspace beyond its territorial jurisdiction.

The Government will also seek to take steps to ensure that, in similar circumstances, other countries adopt a similar attitude.

PART III

MEANS OF DEVELOPMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

TITLE I

ECONOMIC INCENTIVES AND STIMULI

Article 13.- For the purpose of promoting the conservation, improvement, and restoration of the environment and of renewable natural resources, the Government shall establish economic incentives.

TITLE II

EDUCATIONAL ACTION, USE OF SOCIAL COMMUNICATION MEDIA AND NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE

Article 14.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 1337 of 1978</u>. Within the powers constitutionally granted to it, the Government, when regulating primary, secondary, and university education, will seek to:

a.- Include courses on ecology, environmental preservation, and renewable natural resources;

b.- Promote the development of interdisciplinary studies;

c.- Promote the holding of environmental workshops with community participation, and popular education campaigns, in urban and rural areas to achieve an understanding of environmental problems, within the context in which they occur. (N.C. Article 120-12).

Article 15.- Through adequate means of communication, the population will be motivated to formulate suggestions and take initiatives for environmental protection and for the better management of natural resources, and programs for dissemination and training in the identification and management of substances harmful to the environment will be advanced.

Article 16.- To help form and maintain sufficient knowledge and conviction in the community about the need to protect the environment and to properly manage renewable natural resources, the Government, in contracts for television spaces or radio broadcasting frequencies, will stipulate a clause concerning their collaboration with the other contracting parties, in appropriate educational and dissemination programs for the fulfillment of these purposes.

Article 17.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 1337 of 1978</u>. The mandatory National Environmental Service is created, which shall not exceed one year and will be provided free of charge.

The Government will determine the manner in which this service will be organized and provided.

TITLE III

RETRIBUTIVE RATES FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES

Article 18.- <u>Repealed by Art. 118, Law 99 of 1993</u>. "The direct or indirect utilization of the atmosphere, rivers, streams, lakes, and groundwater, and of the land and soil, to introduce or discharge agricultural, mining or industrial waste or refuse, sewage or wastewater of any origin, fumes, vapors, and harmful substances that are the result of lucrative activities, may be subject to the payment of retributive rates for the service of elimination or control of the consequences of the harmful activities expressed.

Rates may also be set to compensate for the maintenance costs of the renewability of renewable natural resources."

Article 19.- The National Government will calculate, by user sectors and by regions that it will individualize, the costs of prevention, correction, or elimination of the harmful effects on the environment.

TITLE IV

ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION SYSTEM

Article 20.- An environmental information system will be organized and kept up-to-date, with physical, economic, social, legal, and in general, data concerning renewable natural resources and the environment.

Article 21.- Through the environmental information system, at least the following types of information will be processed and analyzed:

a) Cartographic;
b) Hydrometeorological, hydrological, hydrogeological, and climatic;
c) Edaphological;
d) Geological;
e) On non-agricultural uses of the land;
f) The forest inventory;
g) The faunal inventory;
h) The legal information referred to in Title VI, Chapter I, Part I of Book II;
i) Contamination levels by region;
j) The inventory of emission and contamination sources;

Article 22.- Official entities will supply the information they have available or that is requested of them, in relation to the data referred to in the preceding article.

Article 23.- Owners, users, concessionaires, lessees, and holders of use permits for renewable natural resources and environmental elements are obliged to compile and supply, at no cost, for the environmental information system, information on environmental matters, and especially on the quantity of natural resources and environmental elements consumed.

Article 24.- The data from the system will be freely accessible for consultation and must be disseminated periodically through effective means, when it is of general interest.

TITLE V

OF STATE FINANCIAL INVESTMENTS IN ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC WORKS AND PROJECTS

Article 25.- A special and exclusively destined item will be included annually in the National budget to finance environmental preservation programs or projects.

Article 26.- In the general project of any public work that uses or deteriorates a renewable natural resource or the environment, a program will be contemplated that fully covers the studies, plans, and budgets for the conservation and improvement of the affected area.

TITLE VI

OF THE DECLARATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECT

Article 27.- <u>Repealed by Art. 118, Law 99 of 1993</u>. "Any natural or legal person, public or private, that plans to carry out or carries out any work or activity susceptible to producing environmental deterioration, is obliged to declare the presumed danger that is a consequence of the work or activity."

Article 28.- <u>Repealed by Art. 118, Law 99 of 1993</u>. "For the execution of works, the establishment of an industry, or the development of any other activity that, due to its characteristics, could cause serious deterioration to renewable natural resources or the environment, or introduce considerable or notorious modifications to the landscape, a prior ecological and environmental study will be necessary, and in addition, a license must be obtained.

In said study, apart from the physical factors, those of an economic and social order will be taken into account, to determine the impact that the execution of the mentioned works may have on the region."

Article 29.- <u>Repealed by Art. 118, Law 99 of 1993</u>. "When the referred works or activities may have effects of an international character on the natural resources and other environmental elements, the opinion of the Ministry of Foreign Relations must be heard."

TITLE VII

OF ZONING

Article 30.- For the adequate protection of the environment and natural resources, the National Government shall establish policies and norms on zoning.

The departments and municipalities will have their own zoning norms, subject to those of a National order, as referred to in the preceding paragraph.

TITLE VIII

OF ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES

Article 31.- In accidents that have occurred or that may foreseeably occur, that cause environmental deterioration, or in other environmental events that constitute a collective danger, emergency measures will be taken to counteract the danger. <u>See DAMA Resolution 618 of 2003</u>

PART IV

OF ENVIRONMENTAL PRESERVATION NORMS RELATING TO ELEMENTS EXTERNAL TO NATURAL RESOURCES

TITLE I

CHEMICAL PRODUCTS, TOXIC AND RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

Article 32.- To prevent environmental deterioration or damage to the health of man and other living beings, requirements and conditions will be established for the importation, manufacture, transport, storage, commercialization, handling, use, or disposal of toxic or dangerous substances and products.

In particular, in the execution of any activity in which physical agents such as radioactive substances are used or when operating with radiation-producing equipment, the requirements and conditions established to guarantee the adequate protection of the environment, of the health of man and other living beings, must be complied with.

TITLE II

OF NOISE

Article 33.- The necessary conditions and requirements will be established to preserve and maintain the health and tranquility of the inhabitants, through the control of noise originating from industrial, commercial, domestic, sports, recreational activities, transport vehicles, or other analogous activities.

TITLE III

OF RESIDUES, GARBAGE, WASTE, AND REFUSE

Article 34.- In the management of residues, garbage, waste, and refuse, the following rules will be observed:

a.- The best methods will be used, in accordance with the advances of science and technology, for the collection, treatment, processing, or final disposal of residues, garbage, refuse, and, in general, of waste of any kind.

b.- Scientific and technical research will be promoted to:

1.- Develop the most appropriate methods for the defense of the environment, of man, and of other living beings;
2.- Reintegrate into the natural and economic process solid, liquid, and gaseous refuse, from industries, domestic activities, or human settlements in general;

3.- Substitute the production or importation of products that are difficult to eliminate or reincorporate into the production process;

4.- Perfect and develop new methods for the treatment, collection, deposit, and final disposal of solid, liquid, or gaseous residues not susceptible to new utilization.

c.- Adequate means will be designated to eliminate and control sources that produce bad odor.

<u>See National Decree 2676 of 2000</u>, <u>See National Decree 1713 of 2002</u>

Article 35.- It is prohibited to discharge, without authorization, residues, garbage, and refuse, and in general, waste that deteriorates the soil or causes harm or nuisance to individuals or human settlements.

Article 36.- For the final disposal or processing of garbage, the means that allow for the following will be preferably used:

a.- Avoiding the deterioration of the environment and human health;
b.- Reusing its components;
c.- Producing new goods;
d.- Restoring or improving soils.

Article 37.- Municipalities must organize adequate services for the collection, transport, and final disposal of garbage.

The provision of this service by private natural or legal persons will require authorization adjusted to the requirements and conditions established by the Government.

Article 38.- By reason of the volume or quality of the residues, garbage, waste, or refuse, the obligation may be imposed on those who produce them to collect, treat, or dispose of them, indicating the means for each case.

TITLE IV

OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS OF NON-RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES

Article 39.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 3083 of 2007</u>. To prevent and control the harmful effects that the use or exploitation of non-renewable natural resources may produce in the environment, conditions and requirements may be established concerning:

a.- The use of water in the beneficiation or treatment of minerals, such that its contamination does not impede subsequent uses of the same water, insofar as these are possible;

b.- The destination that must be given to waters extracted during the drainage of mines;

c.- The use of water in oil exploration and exploitation, to prevent contamination of the soil or of groundwater;

d.- The use of water for the secondary recovery of hydrocarbon or natural gas deposits, to prevent environmental risks or damages;

e.- Gradual works for the defense or restoration of terrain and reforestation in open-pit mining operations, so that the topographical alterations originating from mining labors are adequately treated and do not cause deterioration of the surroundings;

f.- Locations and forms of depositing overburden, tailings, and slag from mines and mineral beneficiation sites;

g.- The installations that must be constructed in the exploitation of hydrocarbons and natural gas, and the precautions to ensure that oil spills and gas leaks do not damage the terrestrial or aquatic environments;

h.- The locations, methods of washing, and operating conditions of ships and other vehicles that transport substances capable of causing environmental deterioration.

Article 40.- The importation, production, transport, storage, and use of gases shall require a prior license.

TITLE V

OF HUMAN AND ANIMAL HEALTH

Article 41.- To prevent the introduction, propagation, and distribution of diseases of man and animals, the National Government may:

a) Declare the existence of a disease in a region or throughout the National territory, and its epidemiological identification;

b) Order sanitary and prophylactic measures, and in general, adopt those that are appropriate, according to the severity of the disease and the danger of its extension.

BOOK TWO

OF THE OWNERSHIP, USE, AND ENVIRONMENTAL INFLUENCE OF RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES

PART I

COMMON NORMS

TITLE I

OF THE DOMAIN OVER RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES

Article 42.- The renewable natural resources and other environmental elements regulated by this Code that are found within the National territory belong to the nation, without prejudice to the rights legitimately acquired by private parties and to the special norms on uncultivated lands (baldíos).

Article 43.- The right of private property over renewable natural resources must be exercised as a social function, in the terms established by the National Constitution and subject to the limitations and other provisions established in this Code and other pertinent laws. (N.C. Article 30). Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court, with the understanding that, in accordance with Article 58 of the Constitution, private property over renewable natural resources is subject to all limitations and restrictions that derive from the ecological function of property.

TITLE II

OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIVITY RELATED TO RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES

Article 44.- The National Planning Department shall coordinate the preparation of inventories and programs regarding the needs of the nation and its inhabitants with respect to natural resources and other environmental elements.

Article 45.- The administrative activity related to the management of renewable natural resources shall be adjusted to the following rules:

a.- It shall be sought that the industrial transformation of goods obtained from the exploitation of resources be carried out within the region where they exist.

In marginalized areas, with prior authorization from the Government, an official entity may directly undertake the economic exploitation of the resources.

The Government may establish stimuli and incentives for private companies to carry out explorations in these areas, always in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, this Code, and other applicable laws;

b.- A reserve of resources shall be maintained in accordance with the country's needs. To fulfill this purpose, the exploitation of resources of National property may be reserved, or in those of private property, internal consumption or the exit of the country may be rationed or temporarily prohibited;

c.- When it involves utilizing one or more renewable natural resources or carrying out activities that may cause the deterioration of other resources or the alteration of an ecosystem, for their prevalent application in accordance with the priorities indicated in this Code or in development plans, the diverse forms of use or means to achieve the latter must be weighed, which produce the greatest benefit in comparison with the damage they may cause in ecological, economic, and social terms;

d.- The plans and programs on environmental protection and management of renewable natural resources must be integrated with the general plans and programs for economic and social development, so that a common approach is given to the corresponding problems and joint solutions are sought, subject to a regime of priorities in the application of policies of ecological management and utilization of two or more resources in competition, or in the competition between diverse uses of the same resource;

e.- The country will be zoned, and areas will be delimited, and special management areas will be delimited to ensure the development of environmental policy and of natural resources. Likewise, priority will be given to the execution of programs in zones that have serious environmental and resource management problems;

f.- The formation of associations or civic groups will be promoted to study the community's relations with the renewable natural resources of the region, in order to achieve the protection of said resources and their appropriate utilization;

g.- It will be ensured, through planning at all levels, the compatibility between the need to achieve the economic development of the country and the application of its environmental policy and that of natural resources;

h.- It will be ensured that renewable natural resources are exploited in an efficient manner, compatible with their conservation and in accordance with collective interests.

Article 46.- When it is necessary to construct works or organize public services for the use of renewable natural resources, each owner shall pay the corresponding contribution for valuation. <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

TITLE III

OF THE REGIME OF RESERVES OF RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES.

Article 47.- Without prejudice to rights legitimately acquired by third parties or the special norms of this Code, a determined portion or the totality of renewable natural resources of a region or zone may be declared reserved when it is necessary to organize or facilitate the provision of a public service, to advance programs of restoration, conservation, or preservation of those resources and the environment, or when the State resolves to exploit them. While the reserve is in force, the affected assets will be excluded from concession or authorization of use to private parties. <u>See Council of State Ruling 0254 of 2001</u>

NOTE: Arts. 47, 56, 60, 61, 62, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 223 and 234 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

TITLE IV

PRIORITIES

Article 48.- In addition to the special norms contained in this book, when determining priorities for the utilization of the various categories of natural resources, the convenience of environmental preservation, the need to maintain sufficient reserves of resources whose scarcity is or could become critical, and the circumstance of the economic and social benefits and costs of each project will be taken into account.

Article 49.- The priorities regarding the diverse uses and the granting of permits, concessions, or authorizations for the same resource, will be previously indicated, with a general character and for each region of the country, according to ecological, economic, and social needs.

The need to attend to the subsistence of the inhabitants of the region, and their economic and social development, must always be taken into account.

TITLE V

OF THE MODES OF ACQUIRING THE RIGHT TO USE RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES OF PUBLIC DOMAIN

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 50.- Without prejudice to the provisions specially made for each resource, the norms of this title regulate in a general manner the different modes and conditions in which the right to use renewable natural resources of public domain can be acquired by private parties.

Article 51.- The right to use renewable natural resources can be acquired by operation of law, permit, concession, and association.

Article 52.- Private parties may request the granting of the use of any renewable natural resource of public domain, except for legal exceptions or when it is reserved for a special purpose or granted to another person, or if the resource has been granted without a study permit, or when, by a decision based on technical concepts, it has been declared that the resource cannot be the object of new utilizations.

Notwithstanding the declaration referred to in the preceding paragraph, if an interested party offers to use technical means that would make some other use possible, the decision must be reviewed based on the new studies available.

CHAPTER II

USES BY OPERATION OF LAW

Article 53.- All inhabitants of the National territory, without needing a permit, have the right to use, free of charge and without exclusivity, the natural resources of public domain to satisfy their elementary needs, those of their family, and those of their domestic animals, provided that legal provisions or the rights of third parties are not violated.

CHAPTER III

PERMITS

Article 54.- A permit may be granted for the temporary use of delimited parts of renewable natural resources of public domain.

Article 55.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 2151 of 1979</u>. The duration of the permit will be fixed in accordance with the nature of the resource, its availability, the need for restrictions or limitations for its conservation, and the amount and class of investments, without exceeding ten years. Permits for periods of less than ten years will be extendable provided that they do not exceed, in total, the referred maximum.

Once the term has expired, an option must be given for persons other than the former holder to compete in the proper procedures for the granting of a new permit.

The permit will be granted to whoever offers and ensures the best conditions for the public interest.

Upon the expiration of the permit, its holder may not allege a right of retention for improvements made.

Paragraph. Added by art. 54, Law 1753 of 2015.

Article 56.- <u>Partially regulated by National Decree 2858 of 1981</u>. A permit may be granted for the study of natural resources for the purpose of planning works or projects for their future utilization. The permit may even cover goods of use already granted, insofar as it deals with a use different from that intended by the applicant and provided that the studies do not disturb the use already granted.

These permits may have a duration of up to two years, depending on the nature of the studies.

The holders will have priority over other applicants for a concession, while the study permit is in effect, and likewise, will have exclusivity to carry out the studies for the duration of the permit.

The term of these permits may be extended when the non-execution of the studies, within the period of validity of the permit, is due to force majeure. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 57.- The holders of the permits referred to in the preceding article may take samples of the natural resources covered by the permit, in the quantity indispensable for their studies, but they may not trade the samples taken in any form.

The delivery of a sample equal to the one obtained to the competent authority will always be required. If the sample is unique, once studied and within a reasonable period, it must be delivered to said authority.

The transgression of this norm will be sanctioned with the immediate revocation of the permit.

Article 58.- While a study permit is in effect, another of the same nature may not be granted, unless it refers to applications or uses different from those intended by the holder, nor may the use of the resource subject to the permit be granted to third parties.

CHAPTER IV

CONCESSIONS

Article 59.- Concessions will be granted in the cases expressly provided for by law, and will be regulated by the norms of this chapter, without prejudice to the special ones contemplated for each resource. <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

Article 60.- The duration of a concession will be fixed taking into account the nature and duration of the economic activity for which it is granted, and the need for the concessionaire to have the resource for a sufficient time so that the respective exploitation is economically profitable and socially beneficial. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 61.- Where applicable, the resolution or contract of concession must contain regulations on at least the following points:

a.- The detailed description of the good or resource covered by the concession;
b.- The financial charges of the concessionaire and the way these can be periodically modified;
c.- The obligations of the concessionaire, including those imposed on him to prevent the deterioration of the resources or the environment;
d.- The compulsions for cases of non-compliance;
e.- The term of duration;
f.- The provisions relating to the restitution of the goods at the end of the concession;
g.- The grounds for forfeiture of the concession or revocation of the resolution;
h. The guarantees to ensure compliance with the obligations of the concessionaire, especially those of replacement or restoration of the resource. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 62.- The following will be general grounds for forfeiture, apart from the others contemplated in the laws:

a.- The assignment of the right to use the resource, made to third parties without authorization from the grantor.

b.- The destination of the concession for a use different from that indicated in the resolution or in the contract;

c.- The non-compliance by the concessionaire with the conditions imposed or agreed upon;

d.- The serious or repeated non-compliance with the norms on preservation of resources, except for duly proven force majeure, provided that the interested party gives notice within the fifteen days following the occurrence thereof;

e.- Not using the concession for two years;

f.- The progressive decrease or depletion of the resource;

g.- The delay in the organization of a public service or the suspension thereof for a period exceeding three months, when attributable to the concessionaire;

h. The others that are expressly stated in the respective resolution of concession or in the contract. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 63.- The declaration of forfeiture will not be made without first giving the interested party the opportunity to be heard in their defense.

NOTE: Arts. 47, 56, 60, 61, 62, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 223 and 234 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

TITLE VI

OF THE REGISTRATION, CENSUS, AND REPRESENTATION OF THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE RIGHT OVER RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES

CHAPTER I

OF REGISTRATION AND CENSUS

Article 64.- Concessions, authorizations, and permits for the use of natural resources of public domain will be inscribed in the classified and detailed register that will be kept for this purpose.

Article 65.- A census of the waters and forests on privately owned properties will be conducted.

The owners will be obliged to declare the rights they have over such resources. Those who fail to comply with this obligation will be subject to compulsions and sanctions until they make such a declaration, decreed in the terms provided by law.

CHAPTER II

OF CARTOGRAPHIC REPRESENTATION

Article 66.- Cartographic representation services will be organized for the objects upon which the rights determined in the preceding chapter fall, and for the renewable natural resources of public domain, by species of resources and by regions.

TITLE VII

RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON PRIVATE DOMAIN AND ON THE USE OF RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES OF SOCIAL INTEREST OR PUBLIC UTILITY.

CHAPTER I

RESTRICTIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND EASEMENTS

Article 67.- Ex officio or at the request of any interested private party, a limitation of domain or an easement will be imposed on privately owned real estate when public utility or social interest so requires by reason of the collective or individual use of a resource, with prior declaration of said interest or utility made in accordance with the laws.

Both the limitation or the easement voluntarily accepted and those imposed by executory resolution or judgment will be inscribed in the corresponding public instruments office, without prejudice to the provisions of this Code on the registration system.

The assistance of the police authorities may be requested to make the limitation of domain or the easement effective.

<u>See General Secretariat Concept 11 of 2002</u>

Article 68.- The concessionaire or the holder of a permit for the use of renewable natural resources of public domain will be obliged to bear, without compensation, the limitations, easements, and other restrictions on the assets he utilizes, imposed for reasons of public utility or social interest, by law or convention.

CHAPTER II

OF THE ACQUISITION OF GOODS FOR THE DEFENSE OF NATURAL RESOURCES

Article 69.- Privately owned property and the patrimonial assets of public law entities required for the following purposes may be acquired:

a.- Construction, rehabilitation, or expansion of irrigation districts; execution of flood control works, drainage, and other related works, indispensable for their operation and maintenance;

b.- Utilization of channels, quarries, deposits, and beds of materials indispensable for the construction of hydraulic works;

c.- Conservation and improvement of hydrographic basins; <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

d.- Installation of water supply, control, or correction plants;

e.- Efficient use of water resources and hydraulic works on private property;

f.- Preservation and control of water contamination;

g.- Establishment, improvement, rehabilitation, and conservation of public services concerning the use of water, such as its supply, sewerage, and generation of electric energy;

h.- Conservation and improvement of soils in critical areas.

Article 70.- For the services of capture, storage, and treatment of waters that supply a population and for the service of wastewater treatment plants, with a view to exercising effective control, or to avoid any activity susceptible to causing contamination, the adjacent lands may be acquired to the necessary extent.

Article 71.- For the purposes of the third paragraph of Article 30 of the National Constitution, the purposes specified in the two immediately preceding articles are declared to be of public utility and social interest. <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

Article 72.- The norms of this chapter do not apply to the acquisition of lands and improvements that the Colombian Institute of Agrarian Reform advances for the fulfillment of its programs.

PART II

OF THE ATMOSPHERE AND AIRSPACE

Article 73.- It is the responsibility of the Government to maintain the atmosphere in conditions that do not cause nuisance or damage, or interfere with the normal development of human, animal, or plant life and of renewable natural resources.

Article 74.- The discharge into the atmosphere of dust, vapors, gases, fumes, emanations, and, in general, substances of any nature that may cause illness, damage, or nuisance to the community or its members shall be prohibited, restricted, or conditioned when they exceed the established levels or limits.

Article 75.- To prevent atmospheric pollution, provisions shall be issued concerning:

a.- The quality that the air must have, as an indispensable element for human, animal, and plant health;

The permissible degree of concentration of isolated or combined substances, capable of causing harm or deterioration to property, to human, animal, and plant health;

The most appropriate methods to prevent and combat atmospheric pollution;

Atmospheric pollution of an energy-related origin, including that produced by aircraft and other motor vehicles;

Restrictions or prohibitions on the importation, assembly, production, or circulation of vehicles and other means of transport that alter environmental protection, in relation to the control of gases, noise, and other polluting factors;

The circulation of vehicles in places where the effects of pollution are more appreciable;

The use of adequate methods to reduce emissions to permissible levels;

The establishment of monitoring stations or networks to locate sources of atmospheric pollution and detect their current or potential danger.

Article 76.- By means of educational programs, the population will be educated about the harmful effects of burning for land clearing or cleaning, and technical assistance will be provided for its preparation by other means. In places where assistance is provided, those who continue with said practice despite having been requested to abandon it will be sanctioned.

PART III

OF NON-MARITIME WATERS

TITLE I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I

Article 77.- The provisions of this part regulate the use of non-maritime waters in all their states and forms, such as:

Meteoric waters, that is, those that are in the atmosphere;

Those originating from natural or artificial rain;

Surface currents that flow through natural or artificial channels;

Those of lakes, swamps, lagoons, and reservoirs of natural or artificial formation;

Edaphic waters;

Subterranean waters;

Sub-channel waters;

Those of snowcaps and glaciers;

Waters already used, or wastewater or sewage. <u>See National Decree 1541 of 1978</u>

Article 78.- With the exception of meteoric and subterranean waters, the others are considered surface waters and can be retained when they are accumulated and immobile in natural or artificial deposits, such as edaphic waters, those of lakes, lagoons, marshes, ponds, swamps, reservoirs or dams; and as currents when they flow through natural or artificial channels.

Article 79.- Mineral and medicinal waters are those that contain in solution substances useful for industry or medicine.

CHAPTER II

OF THE DOMAIN OF WATERS AND THEIR BEDS

Article 80.- Without prejudice to private rights acquired in accordance with the law, waters are of public domain, inalienable, and imprescriptible.

When this Code speaks of waters without further qualification, they shall be understood to be of public domain.

Article 81.- In accordance with Article 677 of the Civil Code, it is understood that water is born and dies on an estate when it naturally springs to its surface and evaporates or disappears beneath the surface of the same estate.

Article 82.- The private domain of waters is extinguished by operation of law for not being used for three continuous years from the entry into force of this Code, except for force majeure.

To declare the extinction, an administrative decision subject to the contentious-administrative remedies provided by law will be required.

Article 83.- Except for rights acquired by private parties, the following are inalienable and imprescriptible assets of the State:

a.- The riverbed or natural channel of the currents;
b.- The bed of natural water deposits;
c.- The maritime, fluvial, and lacustrine beaches;
d.- A strip parallel to the line of maximum tides or to the permanent channel of rivers and lakes, up to thirty meters wide;
e.- The areas occupied by snowcaps and by the channels of glaciers;
f.- The strata or deposits of groundwater.

Article 84.- The adjudication of uncultivated land (baldío) does not include the ownership of waters, channels, or, in general, the assets referred to in the preceding article, which belong to the public domain.

Article 85.- Except for acquired rights, the Nation reserves the ownership of mineral and thermal waters, and their utilization shall be carried out as established by regulation.

TITLE II

OF THE MODES OF ACQUIRING THE RIGHT TO THE USE OF WATERS

CHAPTER I

BY OPERATION OF LAW

Article 86.- Every person has the right to use public domain waters to satisfy their elementary needs, those of their family, and those of their animals, provided that it does not cause prejudice to third parties.

The use must be made without establishing diversions, nor employing machines or apparatus, nor stopping or diverting the course of the waters, nor deteriorating the channel or the banks of the current, nor altering or contaminating the waters in a way that makes their use by third parties impossible.

When for the exercise of this right it is required to transit through others' properties, the corresponding easement shall be imposed.

Article 87.- By operation of law, private domain waters may be used exclusively for domestic consumption.

CHAPTER II

OF CONCESSIONS

SECTION I

ENFORCEABILITY AND DURATION

Article 88.- Except for special provisions, waters can only be used by virtue of a concession. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 89.- The concession for a water use shall be subject to the availability of the resource and the needs imposed by the object for which it is intended.

SECTION II

PRIORITY IN GRANTING

Article 90.- The priority for granting water concessions shall be subject to the provisions of this Code. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 91.- In case of scarcity, drought, or other similar situations, previously determined, and while they persist, the quantity of water that can be supplied and the established order for doing so may be varied.

NOTE: Arts. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 223 and 234 declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

SECTION III

CHARACTERISTICS AND CONDITIONS

Article 92.- In order to be granted, every water concession shall be subject to special conditions previously determined to defend the waters, achieve their convenient utilization, that of the adjacent properties, and in general, the fulfillment of the purposes of public utility and social interest inherent in the utilization.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, for special reasons of public convenience, such as the need for a change in the order of priority of each use, or the occurrence of events that alter environmental conditions, the conditions of the concession may be modified by the grantor, through a reasoned administrative resolution and subject to the contentious-administrative remedies provided by law. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 93.- The concessions granted shall not be an obstacle for the distribution of waters to be subsequently regulated in a general manner for the same current or diversion. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 94.- When the concessionaire wishes to vary the conditions of a concession, he must obtain the prior approval of the grantor. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 95.- With prior authorization, the concessionaire may transfer, totally or partially, the right that has been granted to him. (ENFORCEABLE).

Authorization may be denied for reasons of public utility or social interest, as indicated by law.

SECTION IV

PROCEDURE FOR GRANTING

Article 96.- The owner or possessor of the property or industry may request a water concession. The tenant may also do so, on behalf of the owner or possessor. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 97.- For a concession to be used, the following is required:

a.- Its inscription in the registry;
b.- The approval of the hydraulic works for the service of the concession.

NOTE: Arts. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 233 and 234 declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

CHAPTER III

OTHER MODES OF ACQUIRING RIGHTS TO THE USE OF WATERS

Article 98.- The modes of acquiring the right to use waters shall be governed by the provisions for those referring to the use of natural resources of public domain.

TITLE III

<u>Partially Regulated by National Decree 1594 of 1984</u>

OF THE EXPLOITATION AND OCCUPATION OF CHANNELS, BEACHES, AND BEDS

CHAPTER I

EXPLOITATION

Article 99.- The extraction by private parties of drag materials from the channels or beds of currents or water deposits, such as stones, sand, and gravel, requires a permit.

Likewise, the extraction of materials from channels, currents, or water deposits for public works executed by official entities requires authorization.

Article 100.- Insofar as they authorize works in channels or beds of rivers or lakes, concessions for mineral exploration or exploitation may not be granted without prior authorization from the entity that must ensure the conservation of the channel or bed.

Article 101.- The provisional or definitive suspension of exploitations from which serious danger or prejudice to populations and public works or services arises shall be ordered.

CHAPTER II

OCCUPATION OF CHANNELS

Article 102.- Whoever intends to construct works that occupy the channel of a current or water deposit must request authorization.

Article 103.- To establish tourism, recreation, or sport services in currents, lakes, and other public domain water deposits, a concession or association is required. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 104.- The permanent occupation of beaches shall only be permitted for navigation purposes. Transitory occupation will require a permit, except for that which is verified for subsistence fishing.

Article 105.- The norms of Chapter I of this Title shall be applicable to the occupation of channels of currents and water deposits.

TITLE IV

OF EASEMENTS

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 106.- Easements of private interest are governed by the Civil and Civil Procedure Codes and by the special norms of this Title. (ENFORCEABLE).

CHAPTER II

OF THE AQUEDUCT EASEMENT

Article 107.- To impose aqueduct easements in the private interest of one who has the right to use water, the zone that will be affected by the easement, the characteristics of the work, and the other modalities concerning the exercise of said easement shall be determined. This determination will be made with prior summons of the owner of the property that is to bear the easement, of the holders of real rights over it, and of the persons whom this benefits, and in accordance with the other pertinent provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.

The same procedure shall be followed when it is necessary to modify the conditions of an existing easement. (ENFORCEABLE).

CHAPTER III

OF THE DRAINAGE AND WATER RECEIVING EASEMENT

Article 108.- Every property is subject to a drainage easement in favor of another public or private property that needs it to provide an outlet and direction for surplus waters.

Article 109.- When setting the compensation in favor of the owner of the property that is encumbered with a drainage easement, the benefit that the easement brings to the servient property shall be taken into account, and the obligation to contribute to the conservation of the channels may be imposed on its owner if he benefits from them.

Article 110.- The natural easement of receiving waters shall be governed by Article 891 of the Civil Code.

Article 111.- To impose the easements to which this chapter refers, the norms of Chapter I of this title shall be applied.

NOTE: Arts. 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117 and 118 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

CHAPTER IV

OF THE DAM AND ABUTMENT EASEMENT

Article 112.- The dam and abutment easement consists in supporting, on the property or properties adjacent to the channel of a current or water deposit, the necessary works for a dam or diversion.

Article 113.- Every estate is subject to an abutment easement in favor of a mine, company, city, or town that needs to divert or store water in accordance with the norms of this Code.

Article 114.- Dam works must be constructed and maintained in such a way that the least prejudice is caused to neighboring estates.

In this case, there will only be compensation for the damages they cause.

CHAPTER V

OF THE TRANSIT EASEMENT FOR TRANSPORTING WATER AND WATERING LIVESTOCK

Article 115.- The transit easement for transporting water consists of the right to carry needed water in vessels, from a public use current, through an alien rural property, when one has the right to take the waters according to legal norms. Every owner of an estate shall enjoy this easement when he lacks his own water or it is insufficient.

Article 116.- The owner of an estate that lacks necessary waters shall enjoy a transit easement for watering places, which consists of taking animals through one or more alien rural properties to drink from public domain currents or water deposits.

Article 117.- For the constitution of the easements dealt with in the preceding articles and to use them, it is required that no prejudice be caused to whoever currently needs the waters and is making legitimate use of them, and that such easements be exercised through the places and at the times that the owner of the servient property shall indicate.

These easements may be made to cease when the owner of the servient property demonstrates that they are unnecessary. The manner of using them may also be modified when it causes serious prejudice to the servient property. Controversies to constitute these easements or their exercise will be resolved by ordinary justice.

CHAPTER VI

OF THE BANK USE EASEMENT

Article 118.- The owners of riparian properties are obliged to leave free of buildings and crops the necessary space for the uses authorized by operation of law, or for navigation, or the administration of the respective course or lake, or for fishing or similar activities.

In these cases, there will only be grounds for compensation for the damages that are caused.

In addition to the foregoing, Article 898 of the Civil Code shall be applicable.

NOTE: Arts. 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117 and 118 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

TITLE V

OF HYDRAULIC WORKS

Article 119.- The provisions of this title have the object of promoting, fostering, channeling, and making mandatory the study, construction, and operation of hydraulic works for any of the uses of water resources and for their defense and conservation. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 120.- The user to whom a water concession has been granted and the owner of private waters will be obliged to present, for their study and approval, the plans for the necessary works to capture, control, conduct, store, or distribute the flow. The works may not be used until their use has been authorized.

Exceptions to the provisions of this article will be established according to the type and nature of the works. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 121.- The works for capturing public or private waters must be provided with apparatus and other elements that allow for knowing and measuring the quantity of water derived and consumed, at any moment.

Article 122.- Water users must maintain the constructed works in optimal conditions to guarantee their correct functioning. Under no circumstances may they alter such works with elements that vary the modality of distribution fixed in the concession. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 123.- In works for the rectification of channels or for the defense of marginal slopes, to avoid floods or damage to riparian properties, the interested parties must present the necessary plans and reports.

Article 124.- The owners, possessors, or tenants of properties or user associations may construct, on a provisional basis and without prior permission, defense works in case of extraordinary floods and other similar events of force majeure, giving notice within the six days following the initiation of said works.

Once the danger has passed, the demolition of the provisional works, the replacement of the destroyed ones, or the construction of other necessary new ones may be ordered, at the expense of those who are favored by them, even indirectly and in proportion to the benefit they obtained.

Article 125.- In the concession resolution, the site where the surplus waters used in irrigation must flow, to return to their original channel or to be used by another property, for which the corresponding ditches or channels will be constructed, shall be indicated.

The capacity of the surplus collection works must be sufficient to contain rainwater and irrigation water and to prevent its overflow onto public roads and other properties. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 126.- When floods are produced by causes of rainwater or surplus of waters used in irrigation, the owners of neighboring properties must permit the construction of necessary works to channel the waters, with prior approval of the corresponding plans.

Article 127.- The destruction of works executed without permission or of those authorized that may cause imminent damages that were not foreseeable in times of floods or high waters may be ordered.

Article 128.- The National Government may construct the necessary works for the use of waters in a regulated current or in an irrigation district, when the users are reluctant to their construction, demonstrate economic incapacity to advance the works, conflicts arise among the beneficiaries, or it is necessary to extend the service. <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

The landowners must pay the contribution that corresponds to them for the concept of valuation derived from these works.

Article 129.- In no case may the owner, possessor, or tenant of a property oppose the maintenance of drainage, diversion, or crown ditches.

Article 130.- When it is necessary to construct dikes or dams for the capture of private or public property waters, they will be equipped with the necessary systems to allow the passage of fish.

Article 131.- When one or several persons intend to construct rural aqueducts for irrigation services, they must previously obtain authorization, which may be denied for reasons of public convenience.

TITLE VI

OF THE USE, CONSERVATION, AND PRESERVATION OF WATERS

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 132.- Without a permit, the channels, nor the regime and quality of the waters, may not be altered, nor their legitimate use interfered with.

The permit will be denied when the work implies a danger to the community, or to natural resources, internal or external security, or National sovereignty.

Article 133.- Users are obliged to:

a.- Use the waters with efficiency and economy in the place and for the object provided in the concession resolution, employing technical systems of utilization;
b.- Not use a greater quantity of water than that granted;
c.- Construct and maintain hydraulic installations and works in adequate conditions;
d.- Prevent the waters that derive from a current or deposit from spilling or leaving the works that should contain them;
e.- Contribute proportionally to the conservation of the hydraulic structures, surveillance roads, and other common works and installations;
f.- Permit surveillance and inspection and supply data on the use of the waters.

NOTE: Arts. 47, 56, 60, 61, 62, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 223 and 234 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

CHAPTER II

<u>Partially Regulated by National Decree 1594 of 1984</u>

OF POLLUTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL

Article 134.- It is the responsibility of the State to guarantee the quality of water for human consumption, and in general, for the other activities in which its use is necessary. For these purposes, it shall:

a.- Carry out the classification of waters and establish their destination and possibilities of use through periodic analysis of their physical, chemical, and biological characteristics. All use of water will be subject to this classification;
b.- Designate and approve the most adequate technical methods for the systems of capture, storage, treatment, and distribution of water for public and private use;
c.- Exercise control over natural or legal persons, public or private, so that they comply with the conditions of collection, supply, conduction, and quality of the waters;
d.- Establish requirements for the systems of elimination of excreta and wastewater;
e.- Determine, with prior physical, chemical, and biological analysis, the cases in which the discharge of residues, garbage, waste, and refuse into a receiving source must be prohibited, conditioned, or permitted;
f.- Control the quality of the water, through periodic analysis, so that it remains suitable for the purposes for which it is intended, according to its classification;
g.- Determine the cases in which the use of sewage will be permitted and prohibit or establish the conditions for its use;
h.- Subject to control the waters that become sources of contamination and determine the activities that are prohibited, with specification of area and time, as well as the measures for the recovery of the source;
i.- Promote and foster research and permanent analysis of inland and marine waters, to ensure the preservation of biological cycles and the normal development of species, and to maintain the oxygenating and regulatory capacity of the continental climate.

Article 135.- To verify the existence and effectiveness of the systems employed, industries or activities that, by their nature, can contaminate the waters shall be subjected to periodic control. The owners may not oppose such control and must supply the officials with all necessary data.

Article 136.- Industries that, by reason of their production process, discharge waters with a temperature that is outside the permissible level or interval, may not incorporate them into the receiving currents without prior adaptation.

Article 137.- The following shall be subject to special protection and control:

a.- Waters intended for human and animal domestic consumption and for the production of food;
b.- The breeding grounds and habitats of fish, crustaceans, and other species that require special management;

The sources, waterfalls, lakes, and other deposits or currents of water, natural or artificial, that are in areas declared worthy of protection.

In the cases provided for in this article, the discharge of sewage or solid, liquid, or gaseous waste from industrial or domestic sources will be prohibited or conditioned, according to technical studies.

Article 138.- Zones will be established where it is prohibited to discharge, without prior treatment and in quantities and concentrations that exceed the admissible levels, sewage or residual waters from industrial or domestic, urban or rural sources, into the surface or subterranean, inland or marine waters.

The incorporation into these waters, in said quantities and concentrations, of other materials such as garbage, waste, excreta, toxic or radioactive substances, gases, agrochemical products, detergents, or other similar substances is also prohibited.

Article 139.- To begin the construction, expansion, or alteration of rooms or residential or industrial complexes, plans for drainage, piping, and sewerage and methods for the treatment and disposal of residual waters, previously approved, are necessary.

Article 140.- The beneficiary of any concession on waters will always be subject to the norms of preservation of the quality of this resource.

Article 141.- Industries that cannot guarantee the quality of the waters within the permissible limits may only be installed in previously designated places. For their location in industrial zones, the volume and composition of the effluents and the quality of the receiving source will be taken into account.

Article 142.- Industries may only discharge their effluents into the public sewerage system in the cases and under the conditions that are established. The discharge of industrial or domestic effluents into rainwater collection systems will not be permitted.

Article 143.- With prior analysis of the receiving sources of sewage, or of industrial or domestic waste, the cases in which the development of activities such as fishing, sports, and other similar activities must be prohibited, in the entire source or in sectors of it, will be determined.

Article 144.- The owner, possessor, or tenant of a property may not oppose the inspection or surveillance or the execution of works ordered in accordance with the norms of this Code, on waters that cross or are found on the property.

Article 145.- When wastewater cannot be led to a sewerage system, its treatment must be done in such a way that it does not prejudice the receiving sources, the soils, the flora, or the fauna. The works must be previously approved.

CHAPTER III

OF SPECIAL USES

SECTION I

OF MINING USES

Article 146.- Persons to whom a water concession is granted for the exploitation of minerals, in addition to those provided for in other norms, must be subject to the following conditions:

a.- To keep the channels where the load or waste from the work is thrown clean, so that the waters do not dam up, overflow, or become contaminated;
b.- Not to prejudice navigation;
c.- Not to damage hydrobiological resources. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 147.- In the working of mines, the contamination of the waters necessary for a population, a public establishment, or one or several agricultural or industrial enterprises shall be avoided.

SECTION II

OF THE USE OF RAINWATER

Article 148.- The owner, possessor, or tenant of a property may use the rainwater that falls or is collected on it and while it flows through it. Consequently, he may construct within his property the adequate works to store and conserve it, provided that he does not cause prejudice to third parties.

TITLE VII

OF GROUNDWATER

Article 149.- For the purposes of this title, groundwater is understood to be the sub-channel waters and those hidden beneath the surface of the soil or the seabed that spring forth naturally, such as springs and sources captured at the site of outcrop, or those that require works for their discovery, such as wells, filtering galleries, or other similar ones.

Article 150.- The protection and utilization of groundwater shall be organized.

Article 151.- The owner, possessor, or tenant will have a preferential right in the utilization of the groundwater existing on his property, in accordance with his needs. A concession may be granted for the utilization of groundwater on land other than that of the petitioner, for domestic and watering uses, with prior constitution of easements, when it is demonstrated that it does not exist on his own land at a reasonable depth and when its discovery does not contravene any of the conditions established in this title.

The concession will be granted without prejudice to the preferential right of the owner, tenant, or possessor of the land where the waters are found, who may oppose the request insofar as it harms that right, provided that he is making current use of the waters or obliges himself to do so within a term that will be set for him according to the type and nature of the necessary works and insofar as the subterranean flow does not exceed the water needs of the property. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 152.- When it is verified that the subsoil waters of a basin or a zone are in danger of depletion or contamination, or in a progressive and substantial decrease in quantity or quality, the granting of new concessions in the basin or zone will be definitively or temporarily suspended; the forfeiture of those already granted may be decreed or the use limited, or necessary works and projects may be executed, at the expense of the users, always provided that the consent of said users is mediated, and if this is not possible, through the execution of the work by the valuation system. <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

Article 153.- The concessions for the utilization of groundwater may be revised or modified or their forfeiture declared, when there is a depletion of such waters or the hydrogeological circumstances that were taken into account for granting them have substantially changed. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 154.- The holder of a groundwater concession is obliged to extract them in such a way that no surplus is produced. (ENFORCEABLE).

TITLE VIII

OF THE ADMINISTRATION OF WATERS AND CHANNELS

SOLE CHAPTER

POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

Article 155.- It is the responsibility of the Government:

a) To authorize and control the utilization of waters and the occupation and exploitation of channels;
b) To coordinate the action of official bodies and user associations, in relation to the management of waters;
c) To reserve the waters of one or several currents, or part of said waters;
d) To exercise control over the use of private waters, when necessary to avoid environmental deterioration or for reasons of public utility and social interest; and
e) The others contemplated by legal provisions.

Article 156.- For the utilization of waters, their best distribution in each current or diversion will be studied jointly, taking into account the current distribution and the needs of the properties.

The persons who may be affected by the regulation have the right to know the studies and to participate in the practice of the corresponding procedures.

Article 157.- Any regulation of water use may be revised or varied, at the request of an interested party or ex officio, when the conditions or circumstances that were taken into account to effect it have changed and provided that the persons who may be affected by the modification have been heard.

TITLE IX

PECUNIARY CHARGES

Article 158.- Territorial entities may not levy taxes on the use of waters.

Article 159.- UNENFORCEABLE. The use of waters for lucrative purposes by natural or legal persons, public or private, will give rise to the collection of fees fixed by the National Government that will be destined to the payment of the expenses of protection and renewal of the aquifer resources, among them: <u>Constitutional Court Ruling C-1063 of 2003</u>

a) To investigate and inventory the National water resources; <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>
b) To plan their utilization;
c) To project utilization for common benefit;
d) To protect and develop the hydrographic basins, and
e) To cover all the direct costs of each utilization.

Article 160.- UNENFORCEABLE. The National Government will calculate and establish the fees that may be applicable for the use of waters in lucrative activities. <u>Constitutional Court Ruling C-1063 of 2003</u>

TITLE X

OF WATER USER ASSOCIATIONS

Article 161.- Associations of water users may be established, constituted by those who use one or more currents from the same distribution system or have the right to use those of the same artificial channel.

Article 162.- When a diversion benefits several properties of different owners or possessors to whom a water concession has been granted, by operation of law there will be a community among them with the object of taking the water, distributing it among the users, and conserving and improving the aqueduct, provided they have not entered into a convention for the same purpose.

When the channel does not belong to all and there is no agreement between its owners and those who need to use it to enjoy a water concession, the respective easement will be constituted. (ENFORCEABLE).

TITLE XI

SANCTIONS

Article 163.- Whoever infringes the norms that govern concessions for the use of public waters and the regulations for the use of public or private waters dealt with in this Code, will incur the sanctions provided for in the laws, in the regulations, and in the conventions.

PART IV

OF THE SEA AND ITS SEABED

Article 164.- It is the responsibility of the State to protect the marine environment, constituted by the waters, the soil, the subsoil, and the airspace of the territorial sea and the economic zone, and by the beaches and renewable natural resources of the zone.

This protection shall be carried out with the necessary measures to prevent or avert the contamination of the zone with substances that may endanger human health, prejudice hydrobiological resources, and impair recreational opportunities or obstruct other legitimate uses of the sea.

Among these measures, the necessary ones shall be taken to:

a.- Determine the quality, limits, and permissible concentrations of waste that may be discharged into the sea and establish which ones may not be discharged;

b.- Regulate, in coordination with the Ministry of Mines and Energy, the exercise of exploration and exploitation activities for hydrocarbons or other marine and submarine mineral resources or those existing on maritime beaches, to prevent the contamination of the marine environment in general.

Article 165.- The exercise of any activity that may cause contamination or destruction of the marine environment requires a permit.

Article 166.- Any activity whose object is to exploit marine resources must be carried out in a way that does not cause harm or deterioration to other resources, whether by depletion, degradation, or contamination.

PART V

OF PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES

Article 167.- Primary energy resources are:

a.- Solar energy;
b.- Wind energy;
c.- Slopes, topographical gradients, or falls;
d.- Geothermal resources;
e.- The energy contained in the sea.

Article 168.- Slopes are a usable natural resource for generating energy, distinct and independent from the soil and waters, the domain of which is reserved by the Nation, without prejudice to acquired rights.

Article 169.- Without prejudice to acquired rights, the Nation reserves the domain and use of hydraulic energy that can be developed by the combination of waters and slopes, even if those waters are under concession or are affected by other uses.

Likewise, the Nation reserves the domain of the energy that could be generated by marine currents or by the tides, without prejudice to acquired rights.

Article 170.- Natural or legal persons, public or private, who wish to generate hydraulic, kinetic, or electrical energy, must request a concession or propose an association.

For the concession or association, the indispensable factors of an ecological, economic, and social nature shall be taken into account. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 171.- The norms on water concessions shall be applicable to those for the use of waters and slopes to generate hydraulic energy. (ENFORCEABLE).

PART VI

OF GEOTHERMAL RESOURCES

Article 172.- For the purposes of this Code, geothermal resources are understood to be:

The natural combination of water with an endogenous subterranean caloric source, the result of which is the spontaneous production of hot waters or vapors; and

The existence of endogenous subterranean caloric sources into which it is possible to inject water to produce its heating, or to generate vapor.

Article 173.- Also considered geothermal resources, to which the provisions of this code and other legal regulations apply, are those that emerge naturally or by human works with a temperature exceeding 80 degrees Celsius or that which the law establishes as a limit in special cases.

Geothermal resources that do not reach the minimum temperature of 80 degrees Celsius will be considered as thermal waters.

Article 174.- Without prejudice to acquired rights, the Nation reserves the domain of geothermal resources.

Article 175.- Geothermal resources can have, among others, the following uses:

a.- Production of energy;
b.- Production of direct heat for industrial purposes, or for refrigeration or heating;
c.- Production of fresh water;
d.- Extraction of their mineral content.

Article 176.- The concession for the use of waters to exploit a geothermal source will be granted with the concession of the geothermal resource. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 177.- The necessary measures to eliminate the contaminating effects of saline waters or condensed vapors shall be the responsibility of the concessionaire of geothermal resources with saline content.

NOTE: Arts. 47, 56, 60, 61, 62, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 223 and 234 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

PART VII

OF THE LAND AND SOILS

TITLE I

OF AGRICULTURAL SOIL

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Article 178.- The soils of the National territory must be used in accordance with their conditions and constituent factors.

The potential use of soils will be determined according to the physical, ecological, and socioeconomic factors of the region.

According to said factors, the soils will also be classified.

Article 179.- The utilization of soils must be carried out in a way that maintains their physical integrity and productive capacity.

In the utilization of soils, technical management norms will be applied to avoid their loss or degradation, achieve their recovery, and ensure their conservation.

Article 180.- It is the duty of all inhabitants of the Republic to collaborate with the authorities in the conservation and adequate management of the soils.

Persons who carry out agricultural, livestock, forestry, or infrastructure activities that affect or may affect the soils are obliged to carry out the conservation and recovery practices determined in accordance with regional characteristics.

CHAPTER II

OF THE POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

Article 181.- The powers of the administration are:

a.- To ensure the conservation of soils to prevent and control, among other phenomena, those of erosion, degradation, salinization, or waterlogging;
b.- To promote the adoption of preventive measures on the use of land, concerning the conservation of soil, edaphic waters, and humidity, and the regulation of cultivation methods, vegetation management, and fauna;
c.- To coordinate studies, research, and analysis of soils to achieve their rational management;
d.- To administer and regulate the convenient utilization of communal savannas and floodplains and islands of public domain;
e.- To intervene in the use and management of uncultivated soils or on privately owned land when phenomena of erosion, movement, salinization, and in general, degradation of the environment due to inadequate management or other causes occur, and to adopt measures of correction, recovery, or conservation;
f.- To control the use of substances that may cause soil contamination.

CHAPTER III

OF THE USE AND CONSERVATION OF SOILS

Article 182.- Soils that are in any of the following circumstances shall be subject to adaptation and restoration:

a.- Non-exploitation if, under special management conditions, they can be put into economic use;
b.- Inadequate application that interferes with the stability of the environment;
c.- Subjection to physical-chemical or biological limitations that affect the productivity of the soil;
d.- Inadequate exploitation.

Article 183.- Soil adaptation or restoration projects must be based on technical studies from which it is inferred that there is no deterioration to the ecosystems. Said projects will require approval.

Article 184.- Lands with a slope greater than that determined in accordance with the characteristics of the region must be maintained under vegetation cover.

Also, according to the regional characteristics, cultivation or conservation practices will be established for said lands.

Article 185.- Mining, construction, engineering works, excavations, or similar activities shall be preceded by ecological studies and shall be carried out in accordance with the norms on protection and conservation of soils.

Article 186.- Except with authorization and always with the obligation of adequate and immediate replacement, the natural vegetation of the slopes of communication routes or canals, whether they dominate them or are situated below them, may not be destroyed.

TITLE II

OF NON-AGRICULTURAL USES OF THE LAND

CHAPTER I

URBAN, RESIDENTIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL USES

Article 187.- Urban development will be planned by determining, among others, residential, civic, commercial, industrial, and recreational sectors, as well as oxygenating and buffer zones, and contemplating the necessary ornamental tree planting.

Article 188.- Urban planning will mainly comprise:

1.- The regulation of the construction and development of housing programs according to the needs of protection and restoration of environmental quality and of life, giving priority to the zones with the greatest problems;
2.- The adequate location of public services whose functioning may affect the environment;
3.- The establishment of rest or recreation zones and the organization of their services to maintain a healthy and pleasant environment for the community;
4.- The regulation of the adequate dimensions of land lots, housing units, and the number of people that each of these units and each urban zone can accommodate.

Article 189.- In urban centers, industries that by their nature may cause environmental deterioration will be located in a determined zone in such a way that they do not cause harm or nuisance to the inhabitants of neighboring sectors or to their activities, for which the geographical location, the direction of the winds, and the other characteristics of the environment and the uncontrollable emissions will be taken into account.

Article 190.- The necessary measures will be taken so that existing industries in an inadequate zone, according to the preceding article, are relocated to another in which the mentioned requirements are met, and in the meantime, the necessary arrangements will be made so that they cause the least nuisance to the neighbors.

Article 191.- In the rural sector, the installation of industries that, by their nature, may cause environmental deterioration, will be done taking into account geographical factors, the prior investigation of the area to avoid uncontrollable emissions or discharges causing nuisance or damage to human settlements, to the soils, to the waters, to the fauna, to the air, or to the flora of the area.

CHAPTER II

USES IN TRANSPORT: AIRPORTS, HIGHWAYS, RAILWAYS

Article 192.- In urban planning, the expansion trends of the cities will be taken into account for the location of airports and other sources that produce noise and emissions that are difficult to control.

Article 193.- In the construction of highways and railways, precautions will be taken not to cause environmental deterioration with topographical alterations and to control the emissions and noise of the vehicles.

PART VIII

OF TERRESTRIAL FLORA

Article 194.- The norms of this part apply to any individual of the flora found in the National territory.

TITLE I

OF THE CONSERVATION AND DEFENSE OF FLORA

Article 195.- Flora is understood as the set of plant species and individuals, wild or cultivated, existing in the National territory.

Article 196.- The necessary measures will be taken to conserve or prevent the disappearance of species or individuals of the flora that, for reasons of a biological, genetic, aesthetic, socioeconomic, or cultural order, should endure; among them:

a.- To protect the plant species or individuals that are in danger of extinction, for which the declaration of protected species or individuals will be made prior to any establishment of easements or for their expropriation.
b.- To determine the fluvial maritime ports, airports, and border places for which exports of individuals and primary products of the flora may be carried out;
c.- To promote the development and use of better methods of conservation and utilization of the flora.

Article 197.- The owners of protected individuals will be responsible for the proper management and conservation of those individuals.

Article 198.- For the importation of any individual or product of the flora, certifications must be available where it is officially stated that the norms of the country of origin on plant health and protection of the species were complied with.

TITLE II

OF WILD FLORA

CHAPTER I

OF DEFINITIONS AND POWERS

Article 199.- Wild flora is defined as the set of plant species and individuals of the National territory that have not been planted or improved by man.

Article 200.- To protect wild flora, measures may be taken aimed at:

a.- Intervening in the management, utilization, transport, and commercialization of species and individuals of wild flora and their primary products, whether on public or private property;
b.- Promoting and restoring wild flora;
c.- Controlling the species or individuals of wild flora through ecological practices.

CHAPTER II

OF ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT

Article 201.- For the management, use, utilization, and commercialization of wild flora, the following functions shall be exercised:

a.- Regulating and overseeing the commercialization and utilization of species and individuals of wild flora and their primary products, on public or private property, and the introduction or transplanting of plant individuals into the National territory;
b.- Conserving and preserving the natural renewal of wild flora;
c.- Directly carrying out the utilization of the resource, when ecological, economic, or social reasons so justify it;
d.- Creating and administering zones to promote the development of species.

TITLE III

OF FORESTS

Article 202.- <u>Modified by Art. 203, Law 1450 of 2011.</u> This Title regulates the management of forest soils by their nature and of the forests they contain, which, for the purposes of this Code, are denominated as forest areas.

Forest areas may be for production, protection, and protection-production.

The forest nature of soils shall be determined according to ecological and socioeconomic studies.

Article 203.- A production forest area is the zone that must be permanently conserved with natural or artificial forests to obtain forest products for commercialization or consumption.

The area is of direct production when obtaining products implies the temporary disappearance of the forest and its subsequent recovery.

It is an area of indirect production when fruits or secondary products are obtained, without implying the disappearance of the forest.

Article 204.- A protection forest area is understood as the zone that must be permanently conserved with natural or artificial forests to protect these same resources or other renewable natural ones.

In the protection forest area, the protective effect must prevail, and only the harvesting of secondary fruits of the forest will be permitted.

Article 205.- A protection-production forest area is understood as the zone that must be permanently conserved with natural or artificial forests to protect renewable natural resources, and which, in addition, can be the subject of production activities that are necessarily subject to the maintenance of the protective effect.

CHAPTER I

OF FOREST RESERVE AREAS

Article 206.- A forest reserve area is the zone of public or private property reserved to be destined exclusively for the establishment or maintenance and rational utilization of production, protection, or protection-production forest areas.

Article 207.- The forest reserve area may only be destined for the permanent rational utilization of the forests that exist or are established therein, and, in any case, the recovery and survival of the forests must be guaranteed.

In the case, previously determined, where ecological, economic, or social conditions do not exist that allow for guaranteeing the recovery and survival of the forests, the concessionaire or permit holder shall pay the additional fee required for one-time forest harvests.

Article 208.- The construction of infrastructure works, such as roads, reservoirs, dams, or buildings, and the carrying out of economic activities within the forest reserve areas, will require a prior license.

The license will only be granted when it has been proven that the execution of the works and the exercise of the activities do not threaten the conservation of the renewable natural resources of the area.

The license holder must adopt, at their own cost, the adequate protection measures.

Article 209.- Uncultivated lands (baldíos) within forest reserve areas may not be adjudicated.

A concession may be granted for the use of uncultivated lands devoid of forests, even within a forest reserve area, for the time necessary for the concessionaire to establish artificial forests and be able to utilize them.

The value of improvements made in a region after it has been declared a forest reserve area will not be recognized. Neither will payment for improvements be made in any of said areas when they have been made after the entry into force of this Code. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 210.- If in a forest reserve area, for reasons of public utility or social interest, it is necessary to carry out economic activities that imply the removal of forests or a change in the use of the soils or any other activity distinct from the rational utilization of the forests, the affected zone must, duly delimited, be previously removed from the reserve.

The properties whose owners demonstrate that their soils can be used in an exploitation different from forestry may also be removed from the forest reserve, provided that the protective function of the reserve is not prejudiced.

CHAPTER II

OF FOREST UTILIZATION

Article 211.- Forest utilization is understood as the extraction of products from a forest.

Article 212.- Utilization can be persistent, one-time, or domestic.

Article 213.- Persistent forest utilizations are those that are carried out with the obligation to conserve the normal yield of the forest with silvicultural techniques that permit the renewal of the resource.

Article 214.- One-time forest utilizations are those that are technically carried out in forests located on soils that should be destined for uses different from forestry.

The permit for a one-time forest utilization may contain the obligation to leave the land clear at the end of the utilization, but not that of renewing or conserving the forest.

Article 215.- Domestic forest utilizations are those that are carried out exclusively to satisfy vital domestic use needs.

The products of this utilization may not be commercialized in any form.

The domestic forest utilization must be done only with a permit granted directly to the applicant after prior inspection, with a duration of one year and with a maximum volume of twenty cubic meters annually.

Article 216.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 2151 of 1979</u>. Persistent forest utilizations of natural or artificial forests located on uncultivated lands and other public domain lands can be done directly or by delegated administration or through association, concession, or permit. (ENFORCEABLE).

The maximum area and term will be determined for each concession.

Persistent forest utilizations of natural or artificial forests on privately owned land require authorization.

Article 217.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 2151 of 1979</u>. The forest utilizations referred to in the first paragraph of the preceding article must be done with a prior study and management plan of the necessary works to ensure the renewal of the forest.

Permits will be granted directly and concessions through public bidding.

The administration may sell at public auction or public bidding the timber and products of the forests that it exploits directly.

Article 218.- One-time forest utilizations of natural or artificial forests, on uncultivated lands and other public domain lands, can be done directly by the administration, or by private parties through a permit.

One-time forest utilizations of privately owned forests for agricultural uses do not require the permit referred to in this article, but do require compliance with the legal norms of forest and soil policy.

Article 219.- Forest exploitation by the low-scale sawmilling system and for commercial purposes, carried out directly by peasants who have it as their only source of work, as a means of subsistence, requires a permit granted directly.

Article 220.- The concessionaire or the beneficiary of a permit for persistent or one-time forest utilizations in public domain forests must pay, as National participation, a sum that does not exceed thirty percent of the price of the raw product in the market closest to the utilization site, and which will be settled in each case.

The municipality in whose jurisdiction the forest utilization is carried out will receive twenty percent of the sum paid according to the preceding paragraph.

The beneficiaries of domestic permits are exempted from the provisions of this article.

Companies that have a greater proportion of National capital will be preferred in the granting of the concessions and permits to which this article refers.

Article 221.- The beneficiaries of permits for one-time forest utilization will pay, in addition to the sum fixed in the preceding article, an additional sum per cubic meter of usable wood.

The sums collected in accordance with this article and the preceding one will be destined in their entirety to reforestation programs.

Article 222.- When it is determined that the concessionaire or the permit holder is not in a condition to comply with the technical obligations established when granting the concession or the permit or in this Code and other legal norms, the administration may assume the fulfillment of these obligations, with the cost of the operations being borne by the concessionaire or the permit holder, without prejudice to the sanctions that may arise for the non-compliance. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 223.- Every primary forest product that enters the National territory, leaves it, or is mobilized within it must be covered by a permit. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 224.- Any utilization, primary processing, mobilization, or commercialization of forest products carried out without subjection to the norms of this Code or other legal norms, will be subject to confiscation, but for reasons of an economic or social nature, exceptions may be established.

CHAPTER III

OF FOREST INDUSTRIES

Article 225.- Forest enterprises are those that carry out activities of planting, utilization, transformation, or commercialization of forests or primary forest products.

Article 226.- Integrated forest enterprises are those that carry out the optimal utilization of the greater part of the forest species of a forest.

For a company to be considered as an integrated forest enterprise, the conditions it must meet in the development of its activities will be established, previously fixing for each forest region the number of species, minimum volume per hectare, and complementary transformation processes, and the other necessary requirements for the full compliance with said activities.

Article 227.- Every forest enterprise must obtain a permit.

Article 228.- Forest and transport enterprises are obliged to supply information on production and hauling records and statistical data. Likewise, they must permit officials to inspect installations, storage places, processing, and exploitation sites.

CHAPTER IV

OF REFORESTATION

Article 229.- Reforestation consists of the artificial establishment of trees to form forests.

Article 230.- A forest plantation is the forest originating from reforestation and can be:

a.- Industrial forest plantation, that which is established in a production forest area with the exclusive purpose of dedicating it to direct or indirect production;

b.- Protection-production forest plantation, that which is established in a protection forest area where the direct or indirect utilization of the plantation is conditioned on the maintenance of its protective effect on the resource;

c.- Protection forest plantation, that which is planted exclusively to protect or recover a renewable natural resource and from which indirect utilization may be had.

Article 231.- The execution of protection-production or protection forest plantation programs may be agreed upon with the owners of lands located within forest reserve areas.

For the purposes of this article, the acquisition of properties is declared to be of public utility and social interest; should an agreement be reached between the owner and the administration, the expropriation shall be initiated.

Article 232.- The occupation or possession of forest plantations on soils that are forestal by nature, carried out for agricultural purposes by persons other than the occupants or possessors, shall not grant the right to request the adjudication of the land nor to acquire it by prescription.

Article 233.- The incentives and credit modalities established for reforestation shall also apply with respect to industrial forest plantations made by natural or legal persons in areas granted by concession or permit for utilization. (ENFORCEABLE).

Article 234.- Industrial forest plantations originating from the fulfillment of the obligations of those who utilize National forests are the property of the nation.

A permit or concession may be granted in these areas with preference given to the concessionaire or permit holder who established the industrial forest plantation.

For the purposes of this article, natural forests regenerated and improved by silvicultural means other than planting are assimilated to industrial forest plantations.

NOTE: Arts. 47, 56, 60, 61, 62, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 103, 120, 122, 125, 133, 146, 151, 153, 154, 162, 170, 171, 176, 177, 209, 216, 222, 223 and 234 Declared ENFORCEABLE by Ruling C-126 of 1998 of the Constitutional Court.

Article 235.- A permit is required for the importation of seeds and plant material of forest species.

CHAPTER V

OF FOREST TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

Article 236.- The natural or legal person who requests credit for the establishment of industrial forest plantations must demonstrate that they have suitable technical assistance.

Said assistance will be required when incentives are requested for the establishment and maintenance of forest plantations.

Article 237.- Forest technical assistance shall be regulated and supervised.

CHAPTER VI

OF FOREST RESEARCH

Article 238.- Every forest research project with total or partial financing from the National budget must be previously included in the National plan for forest research.

Article 239.- Any modification or addition to the National plan for forest research will require the opinion of the National Council for Planning and Environment.

CHAPTER VII

OF THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF FOREST PRODUCTS

Article 240.- In the commercialization of forest products, the administration shall have the following powers:

a.- To adopt and recommend technical norms and quality control for forest products;
b.- To exercise control over the trade, importation, and exportation of primary forest products;
c.- To establish bans and limitations on the use of forest species, in accordance with their characteristics, stocks, and market situation.

TITLE IV

OF FOREST PROTECTION

Article 241.- Measures for the prevention and control of forest fires and burnings will be organized throughout the National territory, with the collaboration of all public bodies and entities, which shall give special priority to forest fire extinction efforts.

Article 242.- Every person is obliged to immediately communicate the existence of a forest fire to the nearest authority.

The media, both official and private, must transmit, free of charge and immediately, to the civil and military authorities the reports on forest fires.

Article 243.- Owners, possessors, tenants, occupants under any title, and managers or administrators of rural properties are obliged to permit the transit and stay within the properties of officials, and of all other persons who collaborate in the prevention or extinction of the fire, and shall provide them with the necessary assistance and execute the appropriate works.

Article 244.- The owners, possessors, tenants, and occupants of rural properties are obliged to adopt the measures that are determined to prevent and control fires on those properties.

Article 245.- The administration shall:

a.- Issue the regulations it deems necessary to prevent and control forest fires and to recover the forests destroyed by them;
b.- Regulate and establish phytosanitary controls that must be complied with for forest products, seeds, and forest plant material that are brought into, taken out of, or mobilized within the National territory;
c.- Intercept and confiscate without compensation and freely dispose of products, seeds, and forest plant material that exist, are mobilized, stored, or commercialized in the National territory, when it is contaminated material that may transmit forest pests or diseases, even if the transport of this material is done with the mobilization requirements;
d.- Carry out phytosanitary inspection visits to nurseries, seed deposits, plantations, and deposits of forest products to prevent or control forest pests or diseases.

Article 246.- Every person who possesses, utilizes, transports, transforms, stores, or commercializes forest seeds, forest plant material, or forest products must submit to phytosanitary control.

PART IX

OF TERRESTRIAL FAUNA

TITLE I

OF WILD FAUNA AND HUNTING

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 247.- The norms of this title have the object of ensuring the conservation, promotion, and rational utilization of wild fauna, as an indispensable foundation for its continued use.

Article 248.- The wild fauna found in the National territory belongs to the Nation, except for the species from animal breeding centers and private hunting preserves.

CHAPTER II

OF CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITIONS

Article 249.- Wild fauna is understood as the set of animals that have not been subject to domestication, genetic improvement, or regular breeding and raising, or that have returned to their wild state, excluding fish and all other species whose total life cycle occurs within the aquatic medium.

Article 250.- Hunting is understood as any act aimed at the capture of wild animals, whether by killing them, mutilating them, or trapping them alive, and the collection of their products.

Article 251.- Hunting activities include the breeding, capture, transformation, processing, transport, and commercialization of species and products of wild fauna.

Article 252.- By its purpose, hunting is classified as:

a.- Subsistence hunting, which is that which, without profit motive, has the exclusive object of providing food to the person who carries it out and their family;
b.- Commercial hunting, which is that carried out by natural or legal persons to obtain an economic benefit;
c.- Sport hunting, which is that which is done as recreation and exercise, with no other purpose than its own realization;
d.- Scientific hunting, which is that which is practiced solely for purposes of research or studies carried out within the country;

e.- Control hunting, which is that which is carried out with the purpose of regulating the population of a species when circumstances of a social, economic, or ecological order so require;
f.- Promotion hunting, which is that which is carried out for the exclusive purpose of acquiring specimens for the establishment of animal breeding centers or hunting preserves.

Article 253.- A faunal territory is understood as that which is reserved and bounded for the purposes of conservation, research, and management of wild fauna for exhibition.

Article 254.- An animal breeding center is the area of public or private property that is destined for the maintenance, promotion, and utilization of species of wild fauna for scientific, commercial, industrial, or repopulation purposes.

Article 255.- A hunting reserve is the area that is reserved and bounded for the purposes of conservation, research, and management, for the promotion of game species where hunting may be permitted subject to special regulations.

Article 256.- A hunting preserve is understood as the area destined for the maintenance, promotion, and utilization of species of wild fauna for sport hunting.

Article 257.- A hunting ban is understood as the temporary prohibition of hunting individuals of a determined species in a region.

CHAPTER III

OF THE POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

Article 258.- It is the responsibility of the Public Administration, in matters relating to wild fauna and hunting:

a.- To establish and administer zones for the protection, study, and propagation of wild animals, without prejudice to acquired rights or social interest;
b.- To classify wild animals and determine which may be subject to hunting and the species that require a special type of management;
c.- To advance studies on wild fauna, through research efforts, to achieve an adequate management of the resource;
d.- To ensure the adequate conservation, promotion, and restoration of wild fauna;
e.- To prohibit or restrict the introduction, transplanting, cultivation, and propagation of wild species prejudicial to the conservation and development of the resource;
f.- To execute wild fauna management practices through the development and use of conservation and utilization techniques;
g.- To create and supervise the functioning of zoological gardens and similar institutions, natural history collections, and museums;
h.- To impose periodic or temporary bans or permanent prohibitions and to establish the areas where hunting may be practiced and the number, size, and other characteristics of the wild animals and to determine the products that may be subject to utilization according to the zoological species;
i.- To directly carry out the utilization of the resource when this is justified by ecological, economic, or social reasons, without prejudice to acquired rights or the public interest;
j.- To authorize the sale of products from subsistence hunting that by their nature cannot be consumed by the hunter and his family;
k.- To take the other measures authorized by law or regulation.

Article 259.- A prior permit is required for the exercise of hunting, except in the case of subsistence hunting. For commercial hunting, the permit must be approved by the National Government.

Article 260.- Companies dedicated to the commercialization or primary transformation of wild fauna products will be classified as follows:

a.- Those that develop for-profit purposes through the utilization of any product of faunal species;
b.- Those that, in animal breeding centers and in the exercise of commercial hunting, obtain the utilization of faunal species for exclusively scientific purposes of foreign companies or entities.

Article 261.- Exports made by the companies referred to in the preceding article may only be authorized after obtaining the prior permit dealt with in Article 259.

It must also be previously accredited that the transformation of the products referred to in ordinal a) of Article 260 cannot be carried out in the country.

Likewise, prior certification of the scientific needs of the natural persons or entities, National or foreign, is required, when it concerns the commercialization or exportation referred to in ordinal b) of Article 260. The quotas, ages, and sizes of the exported individuals will be established by the competent authority.

Article 262.- The exercise of commercial hunting does not confer upon the permit holder any right that limits or prevents the exercise of hunting by other authorized persons in the same zone.

Article 263.- Natural or legal persons who engage in the commercialization of species and products of wild fauna must keep record books of the information related to the exercise of their activity.

Article 264.- Only the weapons, equipment, and devices determined by the authority may be used for hunting purposes.

CHAPTER IV

PROHIBITIONS

Article 265.- The following is prohibited: <u>See National Decree 1449 of 1977</u>

a.- To make burns or set fires to corner, cause to flee, or kill the prey;
b.- To use explosives, poisonous substances, pesticides, or any other chemical agent that causes the death or permanent paralysis of the animals, except when it involves methods for capturing live animals;
c.- To use instruments or systems of specifications that do not correspond to those permitted in general or for certain zones;
d.- To hunt in banned areas or during a closed season;
e.- To hunt or commercialize individuals of banned species or whose sizes are not those prescribed, or to commercialize their products;
f.- To cause the deterioration of the environment with products or substances used in hunting;
g.- To acquire, for commercial purposes, hunting products that do not meet the legal requirements or whose legal origin is not proven;
h.- To use products or procedures that are not expressly authorized as a means of control for wild species;
i.- To export live individuals of wild fauna, except those destined for scientific research or those expressly authorized by the National Government.

PART X

OF HYDROBIOLOGICAL RESOURCES

TITLE I

OF AQUATIC FAUNA AND FLORA AND OF FISHERIES

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

<u>Regulated by National Decree 1681 of 1978</u>

Article 266.- The norms of this part have the object of ensuring the conservation, promotion, and rational utilization of hydrobiological resources and of the aquatic medium, and of achieving their permanent availability and their rational management according to ecological, economic, and social techniques.

Article 267.- The hydrobiological resources existing in the territorial and jurisdictional waters of the Republic, whether maritime, fluvial, or lacustrine, are assets of the Nation.

The exploitation of said hydrobiological resources by private parties shall be subject to fees.

The species existing in private domain waters and in private breeding facilities are not National assets, but they shall be subject to this Code and to the other legal norms in force.

Article 268.- Fishing in inland waters and in the territorial sea, including the economic zone of the Nation, carried out in vessels of National or foreign flag, when the latter are chartered by persons or entities domiciled in Colombia, is also subject to the provisions of this Code and other legal regulations.

The norms of this Code and other legal regulations also apply to hydrobiological species or their products when they are obtained outside of jurisdictional waters but are later brought into the country permanently or transitorily.

Article 269.- The norms of this Code related to terrestrial flora are also applicable to aquatic flora.

CHAPTER II

OF CLASSIFICATIONS AND DEFINITIONS

Article 270.- Hydrobiological resources are understood as the set of animal and plant organisms whose life cycle is completed entirely within the aquatic medium, and their products.

Article 271.- Fishing is understood as the utilization of any of the hydrobiological resources or their products through capture, extraction, or collection.

Activities related to fishing are considered to be the processing, packaging, and commercialization of hydrobiological resources.

Article 272.- The fishing industry is understood as any activity of cultivation, capture, collection, extraction, processing, and packaging of hydrobiological products and their commercialization.

Article 273.- By its purpose, fishing is classified as follows:

1.- Commercial, that which is carried out to obtain economic benefit and can be:
a. Artisanal, that which is carried out by natural persons who incorporate their labor into this activity, or by cooperatives or other associations composed of fishermen, when they use systems and gear typical of a small-scale productive activity;
b. Industrial, that which is carried out by natural or legal persons with means and systems typical of a medium or large-scale industry;
2. Subsistence, that which is carried out without profit motive, to provide food to the person who carries it out and their family;
3. Scientific, that which is carried out solely for research and study;
4. Sport, that which is carried out as recreation or exercise, with no other purpose than its own realization;
5. Control, that which is carried out to regulate specific species, when circumstances of a social, economic, or ecological order so require;
6. Promotion, that which is carried out with the exclusive purpose of acquiring specimens to establish or maintain private breeding facilities for hydrobiological species.

CHAPTER III

OF THE POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

Article 274.- It is the responsibility of the Public Administration:

a. To determine prohibitions or bans with respect to hydrobiological species and individuals;
b. To regulate fishing activities in National waters;
c. To advance studies on marine and continental hydrobiological resources and to promote research efforts to achieve the adequate management of the resource;
d. To prohibit, restrict, and regulate the introduction, transplanting, cultivation, or propagation of hydrobiological species that are scientifically prejudicial to the conservation and development of the resource;
e. To provide technical assistance to industries and to establish the fees that must be paid for this service;
f. To establish or reserve special areas for integrated management for the protection, propagation, or breeding of hydrobiological species, in accordance with technical studies;
g. To authorize the importation, transplanting, or exportation of hydrobiological species or their products, and to determine the quantities and species that should be destined for internal consumption and for exploitation;
h. To establish statistical controls for biological research and other activities of the fishing sector;
i. To reserve exclusive zones for subsistence fishing or for the exploitation of species for the benefit of fishermen's cooperatives, community enterprises, or other associations composed of artisanal workers;
j. To promote the other activities necessary for the development and rational and economic utilization of fisheries and for the conservation of hydrobiological species;
k. To directly carry out activities related to fishing;
l. To take the other measures authorized by law or regulation.

CHAPTER IV

OF THE EXERCISE OF FISHING

Article 275.- A permit is required to carry out fishing activities. Subsistence fishing does not require a permit.

Article 276.- In private domain waters and in those granted for the cultivation of hydrobiological species, only the owners or concessionaires, or those who obtain a permit from them, may fish.

Unless the utilization of the fishery has been reserved in favor of the concessionaire, in a canal, ditch, or aqueduct of private property that passes through properties of different owners, any person subject to the conditions established by law may fish, provided that it does not cause prejudice to third parties, contamination of the waters, obstruction of their course, or deterioration of the canals or their banks.

Article 277.- Activities related to fishing must be practiced in a way that does not impede navigation or the natural course of the waters.

Article 278.- In their fishing operations, fishermen shall have the right to use marine and fluvial beaches, provided that these do not constitute areas for the reproduction of wild species, National parks, or public resorts.

Article 279.- In no case shall fishing permits confer rights that impede or obstruct subsistence fishing by the inhabitants of the region.

Article 280.- For the exclusive purpose of practicing fishing, riparian inhabitants are obliged to permit free access to public use waters, provided that no prejudice is caused to them.

CHAPTER V

OF CONTROL AND SURVEILLANCE

Article 281.- The general fishing registry is established, in which persons, vessels, and gear must be inscribed.

CHAPTER VI

OF PROHIBITIONS

Article 282.- The following means of fishing are prohibited: <u>See National Decree 1449 of 1977</u>
a. With explosives and poisonous substances such as barbasco, fique, and other similar ones that cause the death or lethargy of individuals of hydrobiological species, or with unauthorized instruments;
b. With gear, nets, and apparatus of specifications that do not correspond to those permitted or that, being such, are used in places different from those where their use is permitted, and
c. To dry up, alter, or lower the level of rivers, lagoons, swamps, or any other source, for fishing purposes.

Article 283.- The following is also prohibited: <u>See National Decree 1449 of 1977</u>
a. To fish in zones and during periods of ban and to transport or commercialize the product of said fishing;
b. To discharge into a permanent or temporary aquatic medium products, substances, or waste that may cause damage to aquatic life in general, and to its breeding grounds in particular;
c. To destroy the vegetation that serves as a refuge or food source for hydrobiological species, or to alter or destroy the reefs, corals, and natural shelters of those species, with the use of prohibited practices;
d. To dispose of the product of maritime fishing before arriving at Colombian continental territory or to transship it, without prior authorization;
e. To carry explosives or toxic substances on board fishing vessels and vessels transporting hydrobiological products;
f. To fish more than the authorized individuals of hydrobiological species or those of sizes smaller than those permitted and to trade with them, except for exceptions established by law or regulation;
g. The others established by law or regulations.

CHAPTER VII

OF SANCTIONS

Article 284.- Without prejudice to the other sanctions that may apply, the infraction of the provisions on fishing will result in the confiscation of the products and instruments and equipment used to commit it, and if applicable, the suspension or cancellation of the permit.

Any fishing element of prohibited use will be confiscated, except in the exceptions determined for economic or social reasons.

Article 285.- Animals and products of fishing will also be confiscated when they are transported without documentation or with incorrect documentation, and in the other cases established by legal norms for serious violations.

TITLE II

OF AQUACULTURE AND THE PROMOTION OF FISHERIES

Article 286.- For the effects of this Code, aquaculture is understood as the cultivation of hydrobiological organisms with appropriate techniques, in natural or artificial environments, and generally under control.

Article 287.- To improve the economic and social conditions of fishermen, the organization of cooperatives, community enterprises, and other similar associations will be promoted.

Article 288.- The National Government will ensure the financial and economic consolidation of fishing activities. It may establish the incentives provided for in this Code and specifically the following:

a.- Exemption from import duties for:
1. Vessels, gear, nets, electronic and navigation equipment, containers, and packaging for exploitation;
2. Refrigeration equipment destined for the transport, conservation, and storage of fishery products;
3. Machinery, laboratory equipment, and other elements necessary for research and the fishing industry;
b.- Exemption from the payment of fees for navigation aid services, lighthouses, buoys, and piers in all ports of the country;
c.- The creation of fishery schools that will be in charge of methods of fishing, navigation, preparation of motors and gear, conservation of products, and in general, everything related to the better knowledge, exploitation, or industrialization of fisheries;
d.- To organize the technical assistance that must be provided to the fishing industry.

PART XI (Mistake in original document numbering, should be PART X title)

OF THE SANITARY PROTECTION OF FLORA AND FAUNA

Article 289.- To guarantee agricultural and livestock health, strict control will be exercised over the importation, introduction, production, transformation, transport, storage, commercialization, distribution, and utilization of animal and plant species and their products and derivatives to protect the National fauna and flora.

Article 290.- The introduction or importation into the country of animal or plant species may only be carried out with the prior authorization of the National Government.

To grant the authorization, the following factors, among others, will be taken into account:
a. The protection of native species;
b. The need to develop or improve National agricultural and livestock production;
c. The reactions of the new species in the environment in which they are to be implanted;
d. The reactions of the receiving medium and of native species with respect to what is intended to be imported;
e. The reaction to potentially dangerous races or biotypes.

Article 291.- The importation, production, sale, or distribution of hybrids or new species obtained through the use of genetic resources requires special authorization.

Article 292.- The National Government will take the indispensable sanitary measures to prevent the introduction or dissemination of animal or plant diseases.

Any biological control system must be used with prior technical study.

Article 293.- The introduction or importation into the country of animal or plant material or of any potentially dangerous agent requires at least compliance with the following requirements:
a. A legally issued permit;
b. A recent health certificate issued in the country of origin and endorsed by the Consul of Colombia;
c. Inspection and examination by the sanitary authorities;
d. Certification from a National authority accrediting the health status or that the required treatment or observation has been complied with;
e. The documents that prove the quality and purity of the animal or plant material destined for reproduction in the country.

Article 294.- To ensure agricultural and livestock health in the country, border sanitary control zones are created, which consist of security strips in the border regions in an extension that will be determined according to technical opinion.

In addition to those that apply for the rest of the country, special rules may be imposed in the mentioned zones.

Article 295.- The National Government will organize epidemiological surveillance systems to discover, prevent, and attack danger.

Article 296.- When a pest or disease threatens or appears, the administration may, attending to the gravity of the circumstances, declare a state of sanitary emergency to control the pest or disease.

In said state of emergency or when without it special measures become necessary, the administration may take the following:
a.- Mobilization control;
b.- Controlled observation;
c.- Elimination of infected products, and
d.- The other necessary prophylactic measures for the eradication of the pest or disease.

Article 297.- The authorities and private parties in general will collaborate in the control and surveillance efforts.

Every person is obliged to give notice of the appearance of a disease or pest that affects the flora or fauna to the nearest authority, which, in addition to promptly informing the corresponding sanitary authorities, will take the urgent measures imposed by the circumstances.

Article 298.- The National Government may order the elimination of any animal or plant affected by a disease that threatens the integrity of the fauna or flora.

Article 299.- The National Government will establish the requirements that must be observed with respect to animal or plant species and their products and derivatives for internal consumption or for export.

Article 300.- The importation, production, commercialization, transport, storage, and application of products destined for animal or plant use will be controlled and require a permit.

Article 301.- The Government will establish the requirements and conditions for the use of fertilization methods and genetic modifications.

PART V

OF LANDSCAPE RESOURCES AND THEIR PROTECTION

Article 302.- The community has the right to enjoy urban and rural landscapes that contribute to their physical and spiritual well-being. Those that deserve protection shall be determined.

Article 303.- For the preservation of the landscape, it is the responsibility of the administration:

a. To determine the zones or places in which the construction of works will be prohibited;
b. To prohibit the felling or planting or the alteration of the configuration of landscape places that deserve protection;
c. To set height limits or determine styles to preserve aesthetic or historical uniformity, and
f. To take the other measures that correspond by law or regulation.

Article 304.- In the execution of works, urbanizing persons or entities, both public and private, shall seek to maintain harmony with the general structure of the landscape.

PART VI

OF THE MANAGEMENT MODES OF RENEWABLE NATURAL RESOURCES

TITLE I

OF POLICE POWERS

CHAPTER I

OF OFFICIALS

Article 305.- It is the responsibility of the competent officials to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Code and other legal regulations on the matter, and to issue the necessary orders for the surveillance and defense of renewable natural resources and the environment.

Article 306.- In the event of fire, flood, contamination, or other similar cases that threaten to harm renewable natural resources or the environment, the indispensable measures shall be adopted to prevent, contain, or suppress the damage, which shall last as long as the danger lasts.

CHAPTER II

OF THE COLLABORATION OF THE PUBLIC FORCE

Article 307.- The members of the National Police shall cooperate permanently in the measures intended to contain, prevent, or suppress any attempt against the defense, conservation, preservation, and utilization of renewable natural resources and the environment, and in coordinating the efforts of the various organizations existing in the community, aimed at said protection and defense.

TITLE II

OF SPECIAL MANAGEMENT AREAS

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 308.- A special management area is that which is delimited for the administration, management, and protection of the environment and of renewable natural resources.

Article 309.- The creation of special management areas must have determined objectives and be based on ecological and socioeconomic studies.

CHAPTER II

OF INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT DISTRICTS AND RECREATION AREAS

Article 310.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 1974 of 1989.</u> Taking into account environmental or socioeconomic factors, integrated management districts for renewable natural resources may be created, so that they constitute models of rational utilization.

Within these districts, controlled economic, research, educational, and recreational activities will be permitted.

Article 311.- Urban and rural recreation areas may be created, primarily intended for recreation and sports activities.

CHAPTER III

OF HYDROGRAPHIC BASINS

SECTION I

DEFINITIONS AND POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

Article 312.- <u>Regulated by National Decree 1729 of 2002.</u> A hydrographic basin or watershed is understood as the area of surface or subterranean waters that flow into a natural hydrographic network with one or several natural channels, of continuous or intermittent flow, that converge into a larger course, which, in turn, may flow into a main river, a natural water deposit, a swamp, or directly into the sea.

The basin is delimited by the line of the water divide.

Article 313.- When the limits of the subterranean waters of a basin do not coincide with the water divide line, their limits will be extended subterraneously beyond the superficial divide line to include those of the subterranean aquifers whose waters converge towards the basin delineated by the surface waters.

Article 314.- It is the responsibility of the Public Administration:

a. To ensure the protection of hydrographic basins against elements that degrade or alter them, and especially those that produce contamination, sedimentation, and salinization of watercourses or soils;
b. To reduce water losses and waste and to ensure their best use in the area;
c. To prevent erosion and to control and diminish the damages caused by it;
d. To coordinate and promote the rational utilization of the renewable natural resources of the basin under management for the benefit of the community;
e. To maintain or improve the ecological conditions of the water, protect aquatic ecosystems, and prevent eutrophication;
f. To give prior opinion for works or operations of drainage, dewatering, and irrigation and to promote or construct them when private initiative is lacking;
g. To authorize modifications of fluvial channels;
h. To indicate priorities for the establishment of projects, and for the use of waters and the execution of management and handling plans for the basins, in accordance with environmental and socioeconomic factors;
i. To organize the combined use of surface, subterranean, and meteoric waters;
j. To promote associations that seek the conservation of hydrographic basins, and
k. To take the other measures that correspond by law or regulation.

Article 315.- Prior authorization will be required to transfer waters or to make use of services derived from them, such as the supply of hydroelectricity to another basin.

SECTION II

OF HYDROGRAPHIC BASINS UNDER MANAGEMENT

Article 316.- <u>Partially Regulated by National Decree 1640 of 2012.</u> Management of a basin is understood as the planning of the coordinated use of the soil, waters, flora, and fauna, and by management of the basin, the execution of works and treatments.

Article 317.- For the structuring of a management and handling plan, the users of the resources of the basin and the public and private entities that carry out activities in the region must be consulted.

Article 318.- The administration will declare a basin under management when ecological, economic, and social conditions so require.

Article 319.- The management and handling plan for a basin under management will be of mandatory compliance for the public entities that carry out activities in the zone.

Article 320.- For private parties who do not agree to adapt their exploitations to the purposes of the plan, the limitations of domain or the necessary easements to achieve said purposes may be imposed, in accordance with this Code and other current laws.

SECTION III

OF THE FINANCING OF MANAGEMENT PLANS

Article 321.- In hydrographic basins subject to management and handling plans, the construction and operation of infrastructure works and, in general, the direct or indirect utilization of natural resources will be subject to the respective plans.

Article 322.- The owners of properties, whether natural, legal, public, or private persons, who benefit directly or indirectly from works or projects for the management of a hydrographic basin, are obliged to pay a proportional rate for the benefit received, in accordance with the provisions of the laws. <u>See National Decree 2857 of 1981</u>

SECTION IV

OF THE COOPERATION OF USERS

Article 323.- The public and private organizations in charge of the administration of reservoirs, hydroelectric plants, aqueducts, and irrigation districts, and the users, will be obliged to provide the oral and written information they have available, and in general, to facilitate the execution of the management and handling plans.

CHAPTER IV

OF SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICTS

Article 324.- A soil conservation district is understood as the area that is delimited to be subjected to special management aimed at the recovery of altered or degraded soils or the prevention of phenomena that cause alteration of degradation in areas especially vulnerable due to their physical or climatic conditions or due to the type of utility that is developed in them.

Article 325.- The Public Administration shall exercise the following functions:

a. To create, administer, and regulate the soil conservation districts;
b. To elaborate the rehabilitation and management plans for those districts and to ensure their correct execution;
c. To coordinate the execution of technical assistance and credit plans in said districts;
d. To intervene in the activities carried out within the district, especially those of utilization of natural resources and construction of works to prevent them from contravening the purposes for which the district was created;
e. To take the other measures assigned to it by law or regulations.

Article 326.- The owners of lands located in a soil conservation district are obliged to apply the measures and to execute and maintain the works provided for in the rehabilitation and management plans.

CHAPTER V

OF THE NATIONAL PARKS SYSTEM

SECTION I

INTEGRATION AND OBJECTIVES

<u>Regulated by National Decree 622 of 1977</u>

Article 327.- The national parks system is defined as the set of areas with exceptional values for the National heritage that, for the benefit of the inhabitants of the nation and due to their natural, cultural, or historical characteristics, is reserved and declared to be included in any of the categories that are hereinafter enumerated.

Article 328.- The main purposes of the national parks system are:

a. To conserve areas with outstanding values of fauna and flora and landscapes or historical, cultural, or archaeological relics, to give them a special management regime based on comprehensive planning with ecological principles, so that they remain without deterioration;
b. To perpetuate in a natural state samples of biotic communities, physiographic regions, biogeographic units, genetic resources, and threatened wildlife species, and for:
1. Providing environmental reference points for scientific research, general studies, and environmental education;
2. Maintaining biological diversity;
3. Ensuring ecological stability, and
c.- To protect examples of natural, cultural, historical, and other phenomena of international interest, to contribute to the preservation of the common heritage of humanity.

Article 329.- The national parks system will have the following types of areas:

a.- National Park: An area of extension that allows for its ecological self-regulation and whose ecosystems in general have not been substantially altered by human exploitation or occupation, and where the plant and animal species, geomorphological complexes, and historical or cultural manifestations have scientific, educational, aesthetic, and recreational National value and for its perpetuation is subject to an adequate management regime;
b.- Natural Reserve: An area in which there are primitive conditions of flora, fauna, and gea, and is destined for the conservation, research, and study of its natural riches;
c.- Unique Natural Area: An area that, for possessing special conditions of flora or gea, is a rare natural scenery;
d.- Flora Sanctuary: An area dedicated to preserving species or plant communities to conserve genetic resources of the National flora;
e.- Fauna Sanctuary: An area dedicated to preserving species or communities of wild animals, to conserve genetic resources of the National fauna;
f.- Parkway: A strip of land with a road, that possesses singular panoramic beauty or natural or cultural values, conserved for education and leisure purposes.

Article 330.- In accordance with the conditions of each area of the national parks system of ordinals a) to e) of the preceding article, buffer zones will be determined on the periphery to mitigate the disturbances that human action may cause.

In these zones, restrictions and limitations on domain may be imposed.

SECTION II

OF ADMINISTRATION AND USE

Article 331.- The permitted activities in the national parks system are the following:

a. In the National parks, those of conservation, recovery and control, research, education, recreation, and culture;
b. In the natural reserves, those of conservation, research, and education;
c. In the unique natural areas, those of conservation, research, and education;
d. In the flora and fauna sanctuaries, those of conservation, recovery and control, research, and education, and
e. In the parkways, those of conservation, education, culture, and recreation.

Article 332.- The permitted activities in the areas of the national parks systems must be carried out in accordance with the following definitions:

a. Of conservation: Are the activities that contribute to the maintenance in its own state of the renewable natural resources and of the panoramic beauties and promote the biological balance of the ecosystems;
b. Of research: Are the activities that lead to the knowledge of ecosystems and of archaeological and cultural aspects, to apply it to the management and use of the natural and historical values of the country;
c. Of education: Are the activities permitted to teach what is relative to the management, utilization, and conservation of existing values and those aimed at promoting knowledge of the natural and historical riches of the country and the need to conserve them;
d. Of recreation: Are the leisure activities permitted to visitors of areas of the national parks system;
e. Of culture: Are the activities tending to promote the knowledge of the own values of a region, and
f. Of recovery and control: Are the activities, studies, and investigations, for the total or partial restoration of an ecosystem or for the accumulation of elements or materials that condition it.

Article 333.- The areas that make up the national parks system may only be denominated according to the nomenclature that corresponds to their category within the system.

SECTION III

OF THE POWERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION

Article 334.- It is the responsibility of the administration to reserve and delimit the areas of the national parks system even if they have been previously reserved for other purposes.

It is also incumbent upon the administration to exercise the functions of protection, conservation, development, and regulation of the system.

Article 335.- When it is necessary to incorporate privately owned lands or improvements into the national parks system, their expropriation may be decreed in accordance with the law.

SECTION IV

PROHIBITIONS

Article 336.- In the areas that make up the national parks system, the following is prohibited:

a. The introduction and transplanting of exotic animal or plant species;
b. The discharge, introduction, distribution, use, or abandonment of toxic or contaminating substances that may disturb the ecosystems or cause damage in them;
c. The use of any chemical product with residual effects and of explosives, except when the latter must be used in an authorized work;
d. The others established by law or regulation.

TITLE III

OF USER ORGANIZATIONS AND ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE ASSOCIATIONS

Article 337.- The organization and functioning of associations of users of renewable natural resources and for environmental defense shall be promoted.

Environmental defense associations will include users of natural resources and the inhabitants of the area who are not users.

The associations to which this article refers may obtain recognition of their legal personality, in accordance with the law.

Article 338.- Community enterprises may be organized by persons of scarce economic means, for the utilization of renewable natural resources and the exercise of the activities regulated by this Code.

CHAPTER I

OF SANCTIONS

Article 339.- The violation of the norms that regulate the management and use of renewable natural resources will cause the offender to incur the sanctions provided for in this Code, and in what is not specially provided for, in those imposed by the laws and current regulations on the matter.

CHAPTER II

OF THE VALIDITY OF THIS CODE

Article 340.- This Code is effective from the date of its issuance.

Given in Bogotá, D.E. on December 18, 1974.

The President of the Republic,
ALFONSO LÓPEZ MICHELSEN.

And signed by all the Ministers.

NOTE: This Decree is published in the Official Gazette No. 34243.