ISSN 1682-7511

OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF CUBA

MINISTRY OF JUSTICE
SPECIAL EDITION HAVANA, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 16, 2017 YEAR CXV
Website: http://www.gacetaoficial.cu/ — Calle Zanja No. 352, corner of Escobar, Centro Habana
Telephones: 7878-3849, 7878-4435 and 7873-7962
Number 51 Page 985

NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
OF PEOPLE'S POWER

GOC-2017-715-EX51

ESTEBAN LAZO HERNÁNDEZ, President of the National Assembly of People's Power of the Republic of Cuba.

I HEREBY MAKE KNOWN: That the National Assembly of People's Power of the Republic of Cuba, in its session of July 14, 2017, corresponding to the Ninth Ordinary Period of Sessions of the VIII Legislature, has approved the following:

WHEREAS: The Constitution of the Republic of Cuba establishes that the State exercises sovereignty over the inland waters and natural resources of the country; that the waters are socialist state property of all the people and it prescribes the duty of citizens to contribute to their protection.

WHEREAS: The integrated management of terrestrial waters, a renewable and limited natural resource, requires effective planning aimed at satisfying the general interest of society, the economy, health, and the environment, in order to guarantee its preservation in harmony with sustainable economic and social development and the adoption of measures in response to events derived from climate change.

THEREFORE: The National Assembly of People's Power of the Republic of Cuba, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by Article 75, paragraph b), of the Constitution of the Republic of Cuba, agrees to issue the following:

LAW No. 124
OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

TITLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I
SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES

ARTICLE 1.1. This Law regulates the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters found within or upon the Earth's crust, regardless of their physical, chemical, or bacteriological composition, in the space that constitutes the emerged part of the national territory limited by the coastline.

2. The integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters is the process of coordinated evaluation, planning, use, and protection of this element, the land, and related resources, to maximize economic and social well-being, without compromising the health or conservation of vital ecosystems.

ARTICLE 2. The objectives of this Law are:
a) To regulate the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters, a renewable and limited natural resource, based on the general interest of society, health, the environment, and the economy;
b) To establish measures for the protection of terrestrial waters based on their planning and preservation, in harmony with sustainable economic and social development and environmental protection; and
c) To establish measures for disaster reduction due to the impact, fundamentally, of extreme hydrometeorological events on terrestrial waters and adaptation to climate change.

CHAPTER II
PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE INTEGRATED AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

ARTICLE 3.1. The integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters is governed by the following principles:
a) Terrestrial waters are the socialist state property of all the people;
b) The recognition of access to safe drinking water and sanitation as a right of all persons;
c) The efficient and safe use of hydraulic infrastructure;
d) The unity of water planning and management in function of economic and social development;
e) The rational use of water and its reuse;
f) The articulation of water management with environmental and territorial management;
g) The prevention and reduction of water pollution;
h) The management of disaster risk reduction and seismic and extreme hydrometeorological events; and
i) The promotion of a culture of rational water use, collection, and reuse.

2. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources establishes an adequate communication strategy for the achievement of these principles.

TITLE II
OF THE RESPONSIBILITY OF STATE ENTITIES

CHAPTER I
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HYDRAULIC RESOURCES

ARTICLE 4. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, as an organism of the Central State Administration and the governing body for the management of terrestrial waters, is responsible for:
a) Controlling the hydraulic heritage, with special attention to controlling the efficient use of water and its quality;
b) Periodically planning, designing, updating; directing and controlling the monitoring networks for the variables of the hydrological cycle, the quality of terrestrial waters, and the early warning systems, and providing the corresponding information;
c) Directing and proposing actions aimed at improving programs and strategies for the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters;
d) Issuing and controlling the application of hydraulic regulations; as well as proposing to the National Standardization Office the approval of Cuban standards related to terrestrial waters;
e) Directing the Annual Terrestrial Waters Balance process and proposing the corresponding Allocation Plan resulting from this process;
f) Demanding, within its competence, compliance with measures to prevent, confront, and mitigate the effects of extreme hydrometeorological events; and
g) Regulating and controlling the public services of drinking water, sanitary sewerage, and pluvial sewerage or drainage.

CHAPTER II
MINISTRY OF SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT

ARTICLE 5.1. The Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment is responsible for the following in relation to terrestrial waters:
a) Integrating actions related to terrestrial waters into the National Environmental Policy, in the context of the general protection of the environment and natural resources; participating in and controlling the development and compliance of these actions, within its competence;
b) Regulating the environmental impact assessment process and issuing the corresponding license in processes under its competence that involve terrestrial waters; and
c) Directing meteorological surveillance.

2. To promote and control the proper application of science and updated technologies, to systematically raise the scientific rigor of the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters.

CHAPTER III
MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH

ARTICLE 6. The Ministry of Public Health, within the framework of its competence, is responsible for:
a) Integrating actions related to terrestrial waters into Public Health policies, with respect to their impact on human health;
b) Maintaining surveillance over compliance with quality standards in the public drinking water supply service;
c) Maintaining surveillance over compliance with standards in the management of sanitary sewerage, septic tanks, and septic systems; and
d) Issuing the necessary sanitary provisions for the compliance and control of the preceding actions.

CHAPTER IV
LOCAL ORGANS OF PEOPLE'S POWER

ARTICLE 7. The local organs of People's Power, within their respective competences, are responsible for the following in relation to the management of terrestrial waters:
a) To work and demand that the inhabitants of their territory have access to drinking water and sanitation, regardless of the responsibility of the providers of these services;
b) To participate in the planning and rational use of water in function of the economic and social development of their territory; and
c) To work for the protection of terrestrial waters and the reduction of their contamination.

TITLE III
OF HYDROGRAPHIC BASINS AND THEIR COUNCILS

CHAPTER I
OF HYDROGRAPHIC BASINS

ARTICLE 8.1. A hydrographic basin is the area delimited by the divide of surface and underground waters that form a water system, leading them to a main river, lake, infiltration zone, or coast. The boundaries of the surface and underground water divides do not always coincide, so they extend to include aquifers or underground sections, whose waters flow towards the basin in question, for the purposes of integrated management of terrestrial waters.

2. Basins are composed and classified as follows:
a) Sub-basin: area of a secondary tributary that flows into the main river;
b) Micro-basin: area of a tertiary tributary that flows into the main river of a sub-basin;
c) Shared: when the basin area comprises more than one province, according to the political-administrative division; and
d) Of national, provincial, and municipal interest: due to their economic, social, and environmental importance.

ARTICLE 9. The integrated water management in hydrographic basins is carried out by applying the principles and instruments for its use, integral and rational utilization, in order to sustainably satisfy the demands of the economy, society; as well as the conservation and protection of the environment, considering the relationships and synergies between its components, as an expression of adaptation measures to climate change.

ARTICLE 10. The territorial planning of hydrographic basins is the main instrument of the permanent planning process for the sustainable use of their natural resources; the water system is its guiding axis, aimed at maintaining or re-establishing the balance between its economic-social use and its conservation; likewise, it constitutes the basis for actions aimed at conserving, protecting, or preventing its deterioration.

CHAPTER II
OF HYDROGRAPHIC BASIN COUNCILS

SECTION ONE
General Provisions

ARTICLE 11.1. The Hydrographic Basin Councils are the following:
a) National Council of Hydrographic Basins.
b) Provincial Council of Hydrographic Basins.
c) Municipal Council of Hydrographic Basins.
d) Specific Basin Council.

2. The presidents of these councils determine their integration.

3. The provincial and municipal Hydrographic Basin Councils report on their management to the respective Local Assembly of People's Power. The specific councils do so to the National Council of Hydrographic Basins, which in turn reports to the National Assembly of People's Power.

SECTION TWO
Of the National Council of Hydrographic Basins

ARTICLE 12.1. The National Council of Hydrographic Basins is chaired by the highest authority of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources and is in charge of coordinating, controlling, and promoting the implementation of integrated management in the hydrographic basins. Its fundamental axis is water and its protection, in quantity and quality. Participating in it, within their competence, are local organs of People's Power, organisms of the Central State Administration, and other national entities with responsibilities, interests, and activities in the basins.

2. The president of the National Council of Hydrographic Basins determines its composition and submits the Regulations for its approval.

3. The National Council of Hydrographic Basins controls the performance of the provincial, municipal, and Specific Basin councils.

SECTION THREE
Of the provincial, municipal, and specific Hydrographic Basin councils

ARTICLE 13.1. The Provincial and Municipal Hydrographic Basin Councils are chaired by the presidents of the respective administration councils of the local organs of People's Power, or by whomever the Administration Council designates. Representatives from the organisms of the Central State Administration, entities, and other actors involved in the hydrographic basin participate in it, taking into account what is approved by the Council of Ministers in the Territorial Planning Plan.

2. The presidents of the provincial and municipal administration councils of the local organs of People's Power are the highest authorities responsible in their respective territories for the management of the hydrographic basins and, for this purpose, they intervene in the elaboration and control of the execution of their work programs.

ARTICLE 14.1. The Specific Basin Councils are created by the National Council of Hydrographic Basins, in those basins shared or not by several territories, after hearing the opinion of the intervening provinces and municipalities, and are chaired by the presidents of the administration councils of the province that encompasses the largest territory of the basin.

2. The Specific Council of the Cauto Hydrographic Basin, which includes the territories of the provinces of Santiago de Cuba, Holguín, Granma, and Las Tunas, attending to its singularity, complexity, and economic, social, and environmental importance, is chaired by the President of the Provincial Administration Council designated by the Council of Ministers, at the proposal of the National Council of Hydrographic Basins.

TITLE IV
REGIME OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 15.1. Surface and underground terrestrial waters are a unitary resource, integrated into the hydrological cycle.
a) Surface waters are those that flow, channeled or not, and those accumulated in deposits located on the earth's surface; and
b) Underground waters are those contained in aquifers or permeable geological formations, which allow their circulation and storage in their pores or cracks and which may or may not emerge.

2. An aquifer is a geological formation where the water contained in its pores, cracks, and caverns is stored and which, being permeable, allows its internal movement and can be extracted in economically and socially usable quantities.

ARTICLE 16.1. Actions that artificially modify the availability of terrestrial waters include, among others:
a) The incorporation of desalinated seawater into terrestrial water reserves;
b) The modification of the atmospheric phase of the hydrological cycle, which is the continuous and cyclical movement of water in its different states, between the atmosphere and the earth; and
c) The transfer of terrestrial waters between hydrographic basins.

2. The State facilitates, as far as possible, the application of these actions in response to the specific needs and situations that arise.

CHAPTER II
MONITORING NETWORKS OF THE HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE AND WATER QUALITY

ARTICLE 17. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources periodically plans, designs, updates, directs, and controls the monitoring networks of the hydrological cycle related to surface and underground waters and the water quality network, establishes the information related to these, and provides what is appropriate.

ARTICLE 18.1. The monitoring networks of the hydrological cycle referred to in the previous article are composed of the following:
a) Pluviometric network;
b) Pluviographic network;
c) Hydrometric network;
d) Hydrogeological network; and
e) Evaporimetric network.

2. The terrestrial water quality network is composed of:
a) Basic stations for monitoring water quality in sources, whether surface or underground, at the point of abstraction; and
b) Surveillance stations to ascertain the quality of water, whether surface or underground, in water bodies.

ARTICLE 19.1. Also part of the monitoring networks of the hydrological cycle, as the situation demands, are the Early Warning Systems for Hydrological Prevention that operate in the hydrographic basins.

2. Hydrological Prevention comprises the actions adopted to minimize the impacts of extreme hydrometeorological events on society, the economy, and the environment, and to contribute to the better use of water resources.

CHAPTER III
OF THE EVALUATION AND UPDATING OF THE POTENTIAL AND AVAILABILITY OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

ARTICLE 20.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources directs and approves the studies and evaluations to determine the potential of surface and underground water resources; the available water resources at the national, regional, provincial, and hydrographic basin level; and maintains their updating.

2. For the purpose of complying with the provisions of the preceding section, the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources organizes and controls:
a) The investigations and hydrological, hydrogeological, hydrochemical, and hydro-economic studies;
b) The hydraulic development schemes and their updating;
c) The census of sources and users; and
d) The control of water use by source and by user.

3. The evaluation and updating of the potential and availability of terrestrial waters is a fundamental element of the National Hydraulic Plan and the planning of its use, in order to guarantee the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters.

4. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, for the observance of the provisions in Section 1 of this article, takes into account the studies related to terrestrial waters carried out by other entities, which are obliged to report to this organism the results of any study, information, or data of interest for the fulfillment of the powers conferred upon it by this Law.

TITLE V
OF THE HYDRAULIC HERITAGE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 21. The owner or the one who has in usufruct, lease, administration, or by any other concept a good of the state or non-state hydraulic heritage, is obliged to use it for the purposes for which it was granted, to maintain it, and to preserve it in accordance with what is stipulated in the legislation.

ARTICLE 22. The use of the hydraulic heritage may not be detrimental to the exercise of the right of all persons to drinking water and sanitation.

CHAPTER II
STATE HYDRAULIC HERITAGE

ARTICLE 23.1. The state hydraulic heritage is composed of:
a) Terrestrial waters;
b) The beds of natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, lagoons, and reservoirs;
c) The protection zones of water bodies and underground sources that require their establishment, in accordance with the provisions of the standards for each type of work;
d) Sinkholes;
e) Recharge zones and lands that directly affect the protection of waters, upon declaration by the competent authority; and
f) The hydraulic infrastructure and other goods constructed or created and the rights acquired by the State for the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters.

2. In accordance with paragraphs b), c), d), and e) of the preceding section, the following are considered:
a) Bed: the defined natural or artificial channel that contains water in continuous or periodic movement and includes the banks that are floodable during the rainy season. As long as channeling works are not built, the bed is the natural channel.
b) Sources: the surface or underground water bodies contained in natural formations or artificial structures, from which supply to users is generated or can be generated.
c) Sinkholes: the geological depressions that act as a natural drain for rainwater or surface currents of rivers or streams that feed the aquifers.
d) Recharge zone: is the part of the hydrographic basin where climatological, geological, and topographic conditions allow a large part of the precipitation to infiltrate through the soil, recharging the aquifers.

ARTICLE 24.1. The goods that integrate the state hydraulic heritage, the socialist property of all the people, are of:
a) Public service: when by their nature or destination they are used for the provision of a service related to the management of terrestrial waters; and
b) Public use, except when in accordance with their nature or purposes, it is determined by the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources.

2. The goods of the state hydraulic heritage for public use have, according to their nature, common uses such as recreation, navigation, and others that do not require works and installations and that are carried out in accordance with this Law, its Regulations, and other legislation on the matter.

ARTICLE 25.1. The goods listed in paragraphs c) and f) of Article 23, Section 1, may be granted in usufruct or lease.

2. The protective forest strips of rivers and reservoirs may be delivered in usufruct, only when they are destined for forestry purposes.

3. The provisions of the legislation on the matter apply to the improvements of hydraulic infrastructure necessary for the use of state lands delivered in usufruct.

ARTICLE 26. For the transfer of goods and rights of the state hydraulic heritage as a contribution to any form of economic association, their registration in the corresponding registries and the prior authorization by the competent authority are required, in accordance with the provisions of the legislation on the matter.

CHAPTER III
NON-STATE HYDRAULIC HERITAGE

ARTICLE 27.1. The non-state hydraulic heritage is composed of the hydraulic infrastructure and other goods constructed or created; as well as the rights acquired by non-state natural or legal persons for the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters, expressly authorized in accordance with the legislation on the matter.

2. Excepted from the provisions of the preceding section are the hydraulic infrastructure works that, because they are used by several provinces or for reasons of state interest or public utility, are excluded from such condition.

CHAPTER IV
OF THE HYDRAULULIC INFRASTRUCTURE

SECTION ONE
General Provisions

ARTICLE 28. Hydraulic infrastructure includes goods intended for:
a) The observation of the hydrological cycle and water quality;
b) The capture, extraction, desalination, storage, regulation, conduction, control, and measurement of water use;
c) The protection against floods, the rectification of channels and correction of the flow regime, the artificial recharge of aquifers, and any other purpose aimed at the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters;
d) The water supply to cities, towns, communities, and social objectives;
e) The water supply for animal use;
f) The collection, conduction, treatment, and reuse of wastewater, and urban pluvial drainage systems;
g) Aquaculture and shrimp farming in ponds;
h) The use of hydraulic energy;
i) Irrigation and drainage;
j) The supply to industry and other economic objectives;
k) The canalizations of the coastline towards land;
l) The canalizations or drainage of marshes, estuaries, or wetlands; and
m) The modification of the static level of aquifers.

ARTICLE 29. The owner of a piece of land, in the face of the construction of hydraulic infrastructure works, may:
a) Demand that actions that could cause damage due to the effects of terrestrial waters are not carried out; and
b) Claim from the one who caused it the suppression of the causes of the damage and the corresponding compensation.

ARTICLE 30. The provisions of the preceding article apply to hydraulic infrastructure works intended to dam, evacuate waters and spills, to drain and permit natural filtrations or to divert them from their natural course or expand their capacity, when it comes to flood protection works.

ARTICLE 31. The owners of the lands through which terrestrial waterways cross are obliged to allow the passage of persons, materials, equipment, and transport destined for their repair and maintenance. The damages caused by these interventions shall be compensated in accordance with the provisions of the applicable legislation.

SECTION TWO
Of the protection, security, and conservation of hydraulic infrastructure

ARTICLE 32. The protection and security of hydraulic infrastructure includes:
a) The preservation of its structural integrity and the prevention of risks of excessive siltation due to erosion;
b) Operational safety and the monitoring of its technical parameters;
c) Prevention and response to extreme seismic and hydrometeorological events; and
d) Adaptation to climate change.

ARTICLE 33. To modify the assets that constitute the hydraulic infrastructure, the design of which requires the approval of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, their owners or administrators must previously obtain the approval of this Institute, as regulated in the Regulations of this Law.

ARTICLE 34.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, in the face of evidence of risks to the protection and security of the hydraulic infrastructure that is in operation or under construction, is responsible for ordering the immediate halt of its operation or construction, and the eradication of the risks within the period it determines for such purposes.

2. In accordance with the severity of the situation, it may order the demolition or deactivation of the hydraulic infrastructure in question.

ARTICLE 35.1. The owner of the hydraulic infrastructure or their representative may challenge the administrative decisions referred to in the preceding article, in accordance with what is established in the Regulations of this Law.

2. The legitimated person, having exhausted the administrative challenge referred to in the preceding paragraph, may resort to the jurisdictional route, in accordance with the provisions of the legislation on the matter.

TITLE VI
OF EASEMENTS

CHAPTER I
OF NATURAL EASEMENTS

ARTICLE 36.1. For the purposes of this Law, a natural easement is considered to be the relationship established between owners of adjoining lands, which obliges them to permit the passage or flow of waters that, without human intervention, descend from higher grounds; as well as the earth or substances that they naturally carry in their course. Its duration is indefinite.

2. The owner of a property located on a lower plane cannot carry out works that impede the descent of terrestrial waters and what they carry, nor can the owner of the higher property carry out works that aggravate their effects, except with the consent of the involved parties and the authorization for construction as established in the Regulations of this Law.

3. Natural easements, for the purposes of their constitutive title, can be legal and voluntary.

CHAPTER II
OF LEGAL AND VOLUNTARY EASEMENTS

SECTION ONE
Of Legal Easements

ARTICLE 37.1. Legal easements are those established for reasons of public utility or social interest, through a legal provision from the competent authority, which regulates their content and duration, in accordance with the provisions of this Law. They may be agreed upon free of charge or for a consideration.

2. Disagreements or conflicts arising from the declaration, content, and duration of legal easements are resolved by the competent court.

3. The constitutive title of the legal easement or the final judicial resolution issued to resolve the conflicts referred to in the preceding paragraph shall also be inscribed in the Registry of Terrestrial Waters by the owner of the servient property.

SECTION TWO
Of the types of Legal Easements in matters of terrestrial waters

ARTICLE 38. In matters of terrestrial waters, the following legal easements may be established:
a) For the construction of hydraulic infrastructure works;
b) For public use, in the protection zone of water bodies, which facilitates fluvial transit, recreation, fishing, and transportation by flotation;
c) For the passage of people for water intake and of livestock to the watering place; and
d) For the passage of terrestrial waters through intermediate lands.

ARTICLE 39. The easement for the construction of a hydraulic infrastructure work, wholly or partially on a property owned by a third party, requires their authorization.

ARTICLE 40. The easement of public use, free or regulated, where appropriate, in an area of the protection zone of water bodies, which facilitates fluvial transit, recreation, fishing, and transportation by flotation, can only be limited or prohibited for sanitary, security, or public interest reasons.

ARTICLE 41. The owners of the servient lands are obliged to establish an easement for the purpose of guaranteeing access, both for people to take water and for livestock to their watering place, without detriment to the forest protection strip of the watercourses; in all cases, the area to be used is delimited.

ARTICLE 42. Natural or legal persons who need to use terrestrial waters may request that an easement be established for them to pass through intermediate lands. Those who intend to use this right are obliged to:
a) Have authorization for the use of the water;
b) Demonstrate that the requested passage is the most convenient and least burdensome for third parties; and
c) Compensate the owners of the lands over which the waters are spilled or infiltrated, if they are interested.

SECTION THREE
Of Voluntary Easements

ARTICLE 43.1. Voluntary easements are constituted by agreement of the owners of the non-state lands involved, either free of charge or for a consideration.

2. The easement agreement is constituted in a public document before a notary, in which its content and duration are defined. The constitutive title of the easement is also inscribed in the Registry of Terrestrial Waters.

3. Conflicts arising from the constituted voluntary easements are resolved by the competent court.

4. The final judicial resolution that modifies the conditions of the established voluntary easements is also inscribed in the Registry of Terrestrial Waters.

SECTION FOUR
Of the extinction of Legal and Voluntary Easements

ARTICLE 44. The legal and voluntary easements established in this Law are extinguished by:
a) The expiration of the term for which it was constituted;
b) Structural modification of the lands with an impact on the easement;
c) Express agreement of the parties, instrumented by a notarial public document, in the case of voluntary easements;
d) The cessation of the cause for which it was granted;
e) Renunciation by the owner of the property in whose favor it was granted;
f) Remaining unused for more than two consecutive years;
g) Being destined without prior authorization for a purpose other than that for which it was granted;
h) For reasons of public utility or social interest; and
i) Due to environmental impacts.

TITLE VII
OF THE UTILIZATION OF THE HYDRAULIC HERITAGE

CHAPTER I
OF THE USES OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

SECTION ONE
Of the sanitary and ecological flow

ARTICLE 45.1. The sanitary flow is equivalent to the minimum low-flow discharge of the river in natural conditions, which is guaranteed downstream of dams and diversions, with priority character in the use of water, except when it may affect human and animal consumption.

2. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources establishes and updates the sanitary flow, based on the result of the study of rainfall behavior.

3. The ecological flow consists of the discharge downstream of dams and diversions, necessary to maintain the ecosystem functions of the current and the conditions of biodiversity.

4. The ecological flow is determined by the Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment, in consultation with the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources.

5. The calculated ecological flow is included in the process of preparing the annual allocation plan, and its order of priority is modified when circumstances so demand.

SECTION TWO
Order of priorities in the use of terrestrial waters

ARTICLE 46.1. When water availability requires it, the following order of priorities is established for the use of terrestrial waters:
a) Human supply;
b) Animal supply;
c) Sanitary flow;
d) Agricultural irrigation and industrial food production;
e) Rest of the industry;
f) Aquaculture in reservoirs or ponds and shrimp farming;
g) Ecological flow; and
h) Recreational.

2. The volumes of water for the uses described in this article are specified in the annual allocation plan.

ARTICLE 47.1. The order of priorities provided for the use of water in the preceding article may be modified in the following situations:
a) Prolonged droughts, except for human and animal supply;
b) Impacts on water quality, according to its destination;
c) Need to protect prioritized ecosystems due to their environmental, economic, and social value, or environmental impacts that warrant it;
d) Requirements of the national economy; and
e) Any other exceptional situation.

2. The decision to modify the order of priorities for the use of terrestrial waters requires the approval of the Council of Ministers at the proposal of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources.

ARTICLE 48. The use of hydraulic energy does not interfere with the uses described in Article 46.

CHAPTER II
OF CONCESSIONS AND AUTHORIZATIONS

SECTION ONE
General Provisions

ARTICLE 49.1. For the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters, it is required to previously obtain the corresponding authorization, as established in the Regulations of this Law.

2. Authorization is not required to:
a) Use drinking water for domestic purposes, supplied by the authorized legal or natural person to provide this service;
b) Use surface waters for drinking or other domestic purposes, as long as their courses are not diverted nor qualitative alterations are produced;
c) Extract groundwater for domestic use and for animal supply for rational self-consumption;
d) Capture rainwater directly for domestic purposes;
e) Use stored rainwater in ponds or small depressions; and
f) Build rustic or traditional wells for domestic purposes or for animal supply, respecting what is established in paragraph c) of this Section.

3. In the granting of concessions and authorizations, the order of priorities provided for the use of terrestrial waters in Article 46 of the present is taken into account.

4. The granted concession or authorization is registered ex officio in the Registry of Terrestrial Waters.

SECTION TWO
Of the concessions

ARTICLE 50.1. For the administrative concession linked to any form of foreign investment in activities or services related to the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters, the provisions of the legislation on the matter apply.

2. Any form of foreign investment, in activities or services of any nature, that implies the granting of an administrative concession, that requires the use of terrestrial waters, is submitted to the consideration of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, which issues the authorization for use.

3. In the case of concessions for the exploitation of mineral water deposits, which the Ministry of Energy and Mines proposes or grants, the applicant obtains in the consultation process, the pronouncement of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources on the relevance of the use of water; and with the granting of the concession, the corresponding authorization is delivered.

SECTION THREE
Of the authorizations

ARTICLE 51.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources and the other state entities empowered for it, grant the authorizations for the activities related to the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters, which are established in this Law and its Regulations.

2. The authorizations granted under Article 52.1 of the Law and its Regulations are non-transferable.

ARTICLE 52.1. Natural or legal persons require authorization to carry out the following actions:
a) Provide public services of water supply, drinking water, sewerage, pluvial drainage, and cleaning of septic tanks and systems;
b) Use terrestrial waters for the purposes described in Article 46, within the maximum approved quota;
c) Use mineral waters;
d) Develop aquaculture in reservoirs and other water bodies;
e) Administer state-owned hydraulic infrastructure;
f) Carry out the discharge of liquid waste;
g) Reuse waters;
h) Execute the hydraulic infrastructure works described in Article 28;
i) Build wells related to terrestrial waters, except for rustic or traditional ones built for domestic purposes or for animal supply;
j) Navigate in surface water bodies; and
k) Artificially modify the availability of terrestrial waters as related in Article 16 of the present, except for the one provided in its paragraph b) which is executed with the coordination of the competent authorities.

2. Modifications to a granted authorization are processed in the same way as a new application.

3. Authorizations, except those referred to in paragraphs a), h), i), and k) of the first Section of this article, are granted for a period of no less than five (5) years, nor more than twenty-five (25) years, renewable, at the request of the party, for a term not greater than the one initially granted.

4. Applications for authorization are denied by a reasoned resolution by the empowered authorities to which they are addressed.

5. The person dissatisfied with the resolution that denies the requested application may file an appeal before the superior of the authority that denied their request.

6. Once the challenge referred to in the preceding Section is resolved, the person legitimated to be dissatisfied with it may resort to the jurisdictional route in accordance with the provisions of the legislation on the matter.

SECTION FOUR
Of the suspension or extinction of the authorization

ARTICLE 53.1. Authorizations may be suspended or extinguished as appropriate, by the authorities that granted them.

2. Authorizations may be suspended for the following reasons:
a) For non-compliance with the established requirements;
b) For reasons of public utility or social interest and with due compensation;
c) For sanitary interest;
d) For negative impacts on the environment; and
e) For other causes provided for in the Law.

3. Authorizations are extinguished for the following reasons:
a) By decision of the authority that granted it for reasons of public utility or social interest and with due compensation, for sanitary interest, and for negative impacts on the environment;
b) By expiration of the term of validity without its extension having been granted;
c) When the date foreseen for the start of the authorized activity is not met or when its exercise is interrupted for more than three (3) years;
d) When upon expiration of the term of the suspension of the authorization, the causes that determined it persist;
e) The renunciation of the granted authorization;
f) By the death of the natural person;
g) By the extinction of the legal person; and
h) For other causes provided for in the Law.

4. For the specific case of the authorization for the use of terrestrial waters, the temporary depletion of the source is considered a cause for suspension, and the definitive depletion of the same is considered a cause for extinction.

ARTICLE 54. Against the decision of the empowered authority that provides for the suspension or extinction of an authorization, the dissatisfied person may file the appeals provided for in sections 5 and 6 of Article 52 of the present.

CHAPTER III
OF THE ALLOCATIONS

ARTICLE 55.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources proposes to the competent authority the volume of water to be allocated to each user, in accordance with the priorities consigned in Article 46 of the present, which is established in the allocation plan that forms part of the annual economic plan.

2. The holders of mining concessions are included in the allocation plan, without prejudice to the provisions of the legislation on the matter.

ARTICLE 56. The cases provided for in paragraphs b) to e) of Section 2 of Article 49 of this Law are excluded from the allocation plan.

CHAPTER IV
OF THE PUBLIC WATER SERVICES

SECTION ONE
General Provisions

ARTICLE 57. Services related to terrestrial waters are public, regardless of the legal nature of the provider.

ARTICLE 58. For the purposes of this Law, public water services comprise:
a) Public water provision services; and
b) Public drinking water supply services.

ARTICLE 59.1. Public water provision services can be primary or secondary.

2. Primary public water provision services are those that include measurement and distribution at primary delivery points, supplied by surface water sources, and the control of aquifers and hydrogeological sectors.

3. Secondary public water provision services are those that include the distribution of water and its measurement between the primary delivery point and the delivery points to each user.

4. The Regulations of this Law regulate public water services and the entities that provide them.

SECTION TWO
Of the public water provision services

ARTICLE 60.1. The entity that provides primary public water provision services is in charge of:
a) Administering and controlling the terrestrial waters within its territory;
b) Providing the service of water delivery and measurement at the primary points; and
c) Operating and maintaining the hydraulic infrastructure works it administers.

2. The one who provides secondary public water provision services is in charge of:
a) Providing the service of water distribution between the primary delivery point and the delivery point to each user and its measurement therein; and
b) Operating and maintaining the hydraulic infrastructure works it administers.

ARTICLE 61.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources may propose to the competent authority the creation, modification, or extinction of the entities that provide primary public water provision services.

2. The organs and organisms of the Central State Administration to which it is competent, when necessary, recommend the creation, modification, or extinction of entities that provide secondary water provision services.

SECTION THREE
Of the public drinking water supply services

ARTICLE 62.1. The supply of drinking water to the urban population is carried out by the entities authorized to provide public services of aqueduct, sewerage, and pluvial drainage, which conduct it for its distribution from the primary delivery point through the networks they administer, up to the user's property line, guaranteeing:
a) The suitability of the supply source in accordance with the specific standard;
b) The potability of the water at all points of the network, in accordance with the standards that regulate that service;
c) The minimum pressure that guarantees its use;
d) The contracting, measurement, billing, and collection of the service; and
e) Other requirements established by the empowered authorities.

2. The public service of drinking water supply in rural towns and to the dispersed population is provided by the authorized natural or legal person, complying with the established requirements.

3. The public service of drinking water supply is preferably provided through aqueduct systems, which include the capture, potabilization, conduction, and distribution of water to population settlements and other facilities that require it. Exceptionally or temporarily, alternative means are used to guarantee the service, carefully guarding the quality of the water delivered to the users.

4. Potable water is considered that which is suitable for human consumption in accordance with the current technical standard.

ARTICLE 63. The Regulations of this Law regulate the public drinking water supply services provided by the aqueduct and sewerage entities.

TITLE VIII
OF THE PROTECTION OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 64. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, without prejudice to the responsibilities of other organisms according to their competencies, regarding the protection of terrestrial waters, is in charge of:
a) Demanding the quality stipulated in the corresponding standards according to its use or disposition;
b) Regulating and controlling its use and management, its reuse, and the discharge of waste;
c) Encouraging the use of clean technologies;
d) Establishing protection zones around water bodies, underground sources, and recharge areas that require it due to their importance;
e) Adopting measures to preserve the channels of natural currents, the beds of lakes, lagoons, and reservoirs against the dangers of excessive siltation due to erosion; and
f) Any other that contributes to this objective.

ARTICLE 65. For the purposes of this Law, the following are considered:
a) Surface water bodies:
1. Lagoons;
2. Rivers and streams;
3. Wetlands, understood as such: river mouths, estuaries, and deltas, swamps, marshes, and mangroves;
4. Reservoirs;
5. Ponds; and
6. Canals.
b) Underground water bodies: aquifers.

ARTICLE 66.1. Wetlands, as ecosystems closely linked to terrestrial waters, constitute a biodiversity habitat that performs hydrological and ecological functions related to the storage and natural control of water quality and the regulation of the local climate.

2. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment coordinate actions for the conservation, protection, and sustainable management of wetlands and their influence zone and, when necessary, for their restoration.

CHAPTER II
OF HYDROLOGICAL ACTIONS FOR THE PROTECTION OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

SECTION ONE
General Provisions

ARTICLE 67.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, for the protection of terrestrial waters, is responsible for carrying out the following hydrological actions:
a) Establishing protection zones around water bodies, underground sources, and recharge zones that require it;
b) Declaring surface and underground water bodies that are overexploited or at risk of being so;
c) Declaring surface and underground water bodies that are contaminated or in the process of contamination; and
d) Approving the regularization program for the hydrological actions corresponding to paragraphs b) and c) of this article and overseeing its compliance.

2. When the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources declares a surface or underground water body overexploited or at risk of being so; contaminated or in the process of contamination, it informs the corresponding organisms according to their competencies and the affected users; and demands the adoption of the pertinent measures.

3. In the cases included in paragraphs b) and c), the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources acts without prejudice to the liability that can be demanded from those who cause the actions provided for in those paragraphs.

ARTICLE 68. The protection zones for mineral waters are established by the organism of the Central State Administration, the governing body of mining activity, in accordance with the legislation on the matter.

SECTION TWO
Of the protection zones of terrestrial waters

ARTICLE 69.1. The protection zone is the area of land immediately adjacent to the sources of supply, hydraulic works and installations, and natural or artificial channels, delimited for the purpose of protecting terrestrial waters, which is established in accordance with the corresponding standards.

2. The protection zones of a supply source located in an aquifer are established in accordance with the hydrogeological conditions, and their shape varies according to the place.

ARTICLE 70. Forest strips are established in water bodies and natural and artificial channels for the regulation of flows, the protection of water quality, and the reduction of siltation.

ARTICLE 71. In the protection zone, the following are limited or prohibited, in accordance with what the technical standards establish:
a) The use of the soil;
b) The construction of infrastructure works; the extraction of soils and minerals; discharges; and the carrying out of any other activity that may affect terrestrial waters; and
c) Industrial, agricultural, recreational activity, and any other not provided for in this article that could potentially damage the waters.

SECTION THREE
Of overexploited or at-risk surface and groundwater bodies

ARTICLE 72.1. The declaration of a water body as overexploited or at risk of being so implies that authorizations for the use of water will not be granted, temporarily or definitively, without exception, as established in the regularization program.

2. A surface or groundwater body is considered overexploited or at risk of being so when its level is lower than the critical level or very close to it for the time of year in question.

ARTICLE 73.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources in surface or groundwater bodies with risks of overexploitation regulates extractions, establishes a special surveillance regime, and monitors the evolution of the hydrological balance in the zone.

2. The provision of the preceding paragraph applies when in a given period the availability of supply from the source is lower than the guaranteed supply or the exploitable resource, as the case may be.

SECTION FOUR
Of the contamination of surface and groundwater bodies and the obligations of persons to prevent it

ARTICLE 74.1. Those who use water are obliged to take the necessary measures to prevent its contamination and, where appropriate, to return it to the environment in adequate conditions, in the terms set by the Law, in order to permit its subsequent use and maintain the balance of the ecosystems.

2. Those who use chemical products are obliged to control their use to prevent the contamination of terrestrial waters.

ARTICLE 75.1. Surface and groundwater bodies are considered contaminated when:
a) The presence of materials, physical alterations, forms of energy, or conditions, imply changes detrimental to their uses or ecological function;
b) A deterioration of the original quality of the groundwater occurs due to:
b.1) The increase in its salinity due to overexploitation, coastal flooding, or the rise of the sea level.
b.2) Inadequate practices in water management, due to the lack of drainage and sub-exploitation.

2. Regardless of the responsibility they may incur, those who, by accident or incorrect handling of products or execution of processes, contaminate terrestrial waters, are obliged to:
a) Immediately inform the competent authority; specify the magnitude and duration of the event; as well as the characteristics of the contaminating agent; and
b) Carry out actions to remove the contaminating substance and clean the area.

ARTICLE 76. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources declares the contamination of a surface or groundwater body or its risk of being so; approves and controls the specific regularization program for its eradication, taking into account, where appropriate, the certification of the sanitary authority and the environmental authority.

SECTION FIVE
Of the regularization programs

ARTICLE 77.1. The regularization program is established with the objective of rescuing the fundamental parameters for the re-establishment of the exploitation of overexploited or at-risk surface and groundwater bodies and in the contaminated ones.

2. The regularization program is prepared specifically, taking into account the characteristics of the water body, the causes that provoked its affectation, and the measures that are necessary for its recovery, among them:
a) The reduction of extractions;
b) The redistribution of flows;
c) The establishment of the maximum extraction flow for this situation; and
d) The prohibition of the use or closure of the source, as appropriate.

CHAPTER III
OF THE DISCHARGES OF LIQUID WASTE

SECTION ONE
General Provisions

ARTICLE 78.1. Discharge is considered the disposal of liquid waste into water bodies, whatever their nature, and those disposed of on the soil and subsoil.

2. To issue the authorization for discharge, the provisions of the standards for the disposal of liquid waste in water bodies are taken into account, according to the receiving body.

3. Production and service centers, in addition to increasing the efficient use of water, are obliged to implement clean production practices in accordance with established standards; guarantee the adequate treatment of waste; as well as the operation and maintenance of these systems, in order to reduce the generation of liquid waste and its correct final disposal.

ARTICLE 79. The discharge of solid waste into water bodies, natural or artificial underground cavities, or on the ground, which may damage the quality of the waters, is not permitted.

SECTION TWO
Of the public sewerage service

ARTICLE 80.1. The aqueduct and sewerage entities are in charge of providing the public service of:
a) Sanitary sewerage in the urban perimeter, from the user's property line to the final disposal point, with the required quality according to the receiving body; and
b) Pluvial sewerage in the urban perimeter to its final disposal point.

2. In rural towns that have sewerage systems, these services are provided by the natural or legal person authorized by the local organs of People's Power.

ARTICLE 81. Sanitary sewerage comprises the sanitation works that constitute the system of collection, transportation, treatment, and final disposal of liquid waste.

ARTICLE 82. Urban pluvial sewerage or drainage is composed of the natural open-air channels and the sanitation works for the collection, transportation, and final disposal of rainwater, within the urban perimeter.

ARTICLE 83. The Regulations of this Law regulate the public services of sewerage and pluvial drainage.

SECTION THREE
Septic tanks, pits, and latrines

ARTICLE 84.1. The cleaning of septic tanks and pits; as well as the disposal of liquid waste from them, in urban areas lacking sewerage systems, and in rural towns and dispersed population, is carried out by the authorized natural or legal person, as established in the Regulations of this Law.

2. The discharge points for liquid waste from the cleaning of septic tanks and pits are determined after hearing the opinion of the sanitary authority.

ARTICLE 85. The disposal of human waste in places that do not have sanitary sewerage, septic tanks, or pits, is carried out in latrines, the maintenance of which, in hygienic-sanitary conditions, is the obligation of their owner.

CHAPTER IV
OF THE REUSE AND RECYCLING OF WATER

ARTICLE 86.1. The natural or legal person authorized to use water for technical-productive or service purposes, which generates wastewater, is obliged to recycle or reuse it according to the technical standards of the process and to treat the rest conveniently before disposing of it in water bodies or on the soil, as established.

2. Wastewater is that which has been degraded by its use.

ARTICLE 87. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources promotes, regulates, and controls the recycling and reuse of water according to its physical-chemical and bacteriological characteristics; as well as the purpose for which it is intended, in coordination with the sanitary authority and others that correspond by the nature of the activity.

ARTICLE 88.1. For the purposes of this Law, reuse of water is understood when it is used in one or more successive activities different from the initial authorized destination.

2. Water recycling is considered when it is destined for the same purpose for which its use was authorized, provided that it maintains the quality parameters it demands.

3. Reused waters can be treated, or not.

4. Depending on their origin or provenance, reused waters can come from domestic, industrial, pluvial drainage, or agricultural drainage use.

ARTICLE 89. The person authorized to use terrestrial water does not require authorization to recycle it, when they comply with what is established in Section 2 of the preceding article.

ARTICLE 90.1. Whoever intends to reuse wastewater requires the corresponding authorization.

2. When a third party intends to use an effluent of water discharged by a person previously authorized to do so, they must accompany a request for authorization to reuse that water; as well as the express evidence of the consent of the said holder.

3. The discharge and use of wastewater; as well as that of reused or recycled waters, is carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Law and its Regulations.

TITLE IX
OF PREVENTION AND RESPONSE TO FLOODS AND DROUGHTS AND ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 91.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources is in charge of:
a) Governing, approving, and controlling the Disaster Reduction Plans to prevent and respond to floods, droughts, and working on adaptation to climate change, according to the guidelines of the State and the Government and the National General Staff of Civil Defense; and
b) Monitoring extreme hydrometeorological events through its hydrological surveillance system and alerting the competent authorities for the adoption of the pertinent protection measures, as part of the Hydrometeorological System for exceptional situations.

2. In the disaster reduction plans to respond to floods and droughts, the measures approved by the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources are taken into account.

3. For the purposes of the preceding paragraph, disaster reduction is understood as the set of preventive, preparation, response, and recovery activities adopted with the objective of protecting the population, the economy, and the environment from the negative effects of extreme hydrometeorological events.

ARTICLE 92. In the Hydraulic Development Plans at different territorial scales, actions to prevent and respond to floods and droughts are included; as well as measures for adaptation and mitigation to climate change.

CHAPTER II
OF PREVENTION AND RESPONSE TO FLOODS

ARTICLE 93. The organisms of the Central State Administration and national entities within the scope of their competence, undertake prevention, adaptation, and confrontation actions to minimize the risks generated by the occurrence of floods.

ARTICLE 94. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, based on the results of hydrological surveillance and the Early Warning systems, keeps the competent authorities informed about:
a) The behavior of precipitation and its assessment;
b) The filling of reservoirs and the technical state of those with potential risks; and
c) The dangers of flooding downstream of reservoirs due to discharges.

ARTICLE 95. In the presence of floods, those in charge of the water supply prepare and comply with the measures to guarantee its distribution with the required quality, according to what is established in the current legislation and the order of priorities provided for in this Law.

ARTICLE 96.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources determines and declares the flood zones and establishes the alert, operation, control, and monitoring measures for them.

2. The declaration of a flood zone is inscribed in the Registry of Terrestrial Waters.

ARTICLE 97. The Institute of Physical Planning, as the competent authority in matters of territorial and urban planning, when granting authorization for the exercise of a productive activity, residential development, or any other action, is obliged to consider the flood zones, after consulting the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources.

ARTICLE 98. Flood zones are determined taking into account, among other aspects:
a) The frequency and intensity of the rains that cause floods and overflowing of rivers, streams, and lagoons and the maximum discharge levels of the reservoirs;
b) Other natural phenomena or not, that cause landslides that obstruct or limit a river course or the rupture of reservoirs or other constructions;
c) The frequency of the floods and the risk levels they generate; and
d) The impact that floods can have on the safety of people and property, if the corresponding protection measures are not adopted.

CHAPTER III
OF PREVENTION AND RESPONSE TO DROUGHTS

ARTICLE 99. The organisms of the Central State Administration, the local organs of People's Power, and national entities, within the scope of their competence, undertake prevention, adaptation, and confrontation actions that allow minimizing the risks generated by the occurrence of eventual periods of drought.

ARTICLE 100. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, based on the results of hydrological surveillance:
a) Proposes to the National General Staff of Civil Defense the establishment of the response phase to the danger of drought;
b) Keeps the competent authorities informed about:
1. The behavior of precipitation and its assessment;
2. The state of the sources; and
3. The possibility and capacity to transfer water to the affected areas.

ARTICLE 101. In the presence of droughts, those in charge of the water supply prepare and comply with the disaster risk reduction measures for this cause, according to what is established in the current legislation and the order of priorities provided for in this Law.

ARTICLE 102. During the period of drought, the disaster reduction plans prevail over the use of terrestrial waters and the allocation plan.

TITLE X
OF THE ECONOMIC REGIME OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 103.1. The economic regime of terrestrial waters is destined for hydraulic maintenance and development.

2. The economic regime of terrestrial waters is constituted by:
a) The revenues collected in the management of water;
b) Budgetary financing, which may include revenues derived from the application of taxes and the contraventional regime;
c) The revenues from the provision of public services and other services;
d) Revenues from the export of products, services, and technical assistance linked to terrestrial waters; and
e) Donations and development aid credits.

CHAPTER II
OF THE TRIBUTES

ARTICLE 104.1. Those authorized to use terrestrial waters for technical-productive or service purposes, who capture it directly, pay a tribute for said use, in accordance with what is established by the competent authority.

2. The adjustments required for the application of what is referred to in the preceding Section are established in the Budget Law for the corresponding year.

ARTICLE 105. Those authorized to make discharges of liquid waste pay a tribute, in accordance with what is established by the law on the matter.

CHAPTER III
OF THE TARIFFS

ARTICLE 106.1. The tariffs for water provision and drinking water services are also established to encourage their saving and correct waste.

2. The authorized entity charges a tariff for the provision of the following services related to the management of terrestrial waters:
a) Those associated with hydraulic management;
b) Those of water provision;
c) Those of drinking water;
d) Those of sanitary sewerage; and
e) Others linked to the disposal of wastewater.

ARTICLE 107. The services related to hydraulic management that are established in paragraph a) of the preceding article are provided exclusively to the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources by the authorized entities and consist of:
a) Operation and maintenance of the pluviometric, pluviographic, hydrometric, hydrogeological, and evaporimetric networks; as well as the water quality network;
b) Primary registration and results of the observations of the preceding paragraph;
c) Operation of the early warning systems;
d) Information for the preparation of the annual water balance;
e) Control of the water allocation plan and its systematic information;
f) Operation, inspection, and maintenance of the flood protection works and of natural and artificial recharge; and
g) Other activities that are necessary for more efficient hydraulic management.

CHAPTER IV
OF EXCESS CONSUMPTION

ARTICLE 108. Whoever exceeds the authorized water consumption for technical-productive or service activities for a period is obliged to pay the amount determined and to comply with the measures established by the competent authority.

ARTICLE 109. The determination of the amount of the payment for excess consumption; the procedure for its determination; application and destination are governed by the provisions of special legislation.

CHAPTER V
OF STATE FINANCING

ARTICLE 110. The following are financed by the State budget:
a) The investments and major maintenance of the state hydraulic infrastructure that, due to its financial amount, its social impact, and its transcendence in the sustainable use of terrestrial waters, is so considered;
b) The cleaning and maintenance of urban pluvial drainage, including ditches, streams, and rivers, within the urban perimeter;
c) The depreciation of the hydraulic infrastructure heritage of the State;
d) The volume of water delivered to satisfy the sanitary and ecological flow, if applicable;
e) The services associated with hydraulic management referred to in Article 106;
f) The actions of research-development and of technical training and qualification;
g) The investigations, studies, and schemes necessary for hydraulic planning;
h) The forestation and reforestation of the protective forests of terrestrial waters and the control of soil erosion for that purpose;
i) The amortization of development aid credits; and
j) Other expenses of the budgeted entities responsible for hydraulic management.

TITLE XI
OF HYDRAULIC PLANNING

CHAPTER I
OF HYDRAULIC PLANNING

ARTICLE 111. In Hydraulic Planning, the strategies for the rational and sustainable use of terrestrial waters are determined, in function of the development of the economy, society, and the protection of the environment; as well as the necessary hydraulic infrastructure for it.

ARTICLE 112. Hydraulic Planning is based on comprehensive technical-economic studies and territorial scope schemes, prepared by the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources or by the local organs of People's Power, other organisms of the Central State Administration, or entities linked to the use of terrestrial waters, and on the strategic environmental assessment of the hydraulic plans.

CHAPTER II
OF THE NATIONAL HYDRAULIC PLAN

ARTICLE 113. The National Hydraulic Plan is part of the country's Economic and Social Development Plan and is the fundamental instrument for planning the use of terrestrial waters, which materializes Hydraulic Planning.

ARTICLE 114. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources is in charge of preparing and proposing the National Hydraulic Plan to the Ministry of Economy and Planning, in whose preparation other organisms of the Central State Administration, the provincial organs of People's Power and the special municipality of Isla de la Juventud, and other national entities that make use of terrestrial waters participate.

ARTICLE 115.1. The Council of Ministers approves the National Hydraulic Plan, which has a validity period of five (5) years and is updated when supervening reasons justify it.

2. The National Hydraulic Plan, once approved, is communicated by the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources to the local assemblies of People's Power, within their competence.

CHAPTER III
OF THE ANNUAL PLANNING PROCESS

ARTICLE 116. The annual planning process includes the Water Balance, the Allocation Plan, and the control of its execution, which is the basic element of the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters.

ARTICLE 117. The Water Balance establishes the relationship between the demand of each user and the availability of the source at the delivery or capture point, and is carried out in accordance with the priorities consigned in this Law.

ARTICLE 118. To determine the availability of the supply source, the following are taken into account:
a) Its hydro-economic parameters;
b) The behavior of precipitation;
c) The technical state of the supplying source, and the restrictions on its exploitation, if any.

ARTICLE 119. In the Water Balance, the volume of water to be allocated per source to each user for its use in the different economic and social activities is determined and proposed.

ARTICLE 120. The Allocation Plan, once approved, as part of the Annual Plan of the national economy, is the basis for the operation of the sources and the water deliveries.

ARTICLE 121.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources and the other state entities empowered for it, carry out the control of the execution of the allocation plan, to verify the amount of water used, its destination, productivity, and correspondence with the plan.

2. Water productivity is the production obtained or the unitary service provided per volumetric unit of water, expressed in the unit of measurement used for the activity in question.

ARTICLE 122. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources prepares the Water Balance and the Allocation Plan in accordance with what is established in this Law and in its Regulations.

TITLE XII
OF THE INSPECTION AND CONTROL OF THE INTEGRATED AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

ARTICLE 123.1. The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources organizes, directs, and, where appropriate, executes the state inspection of the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters, based on what is regulated in this Law, its Regulations, and other corresponding provisions.

2. The subjects of the state inspection are the natural and legal persons who are users of terrestrial waters.

ARTICLE 124. The objectives of the state inspection of terrestrial waters are the following:
a) To verify compliance with the current legislation on terrestrial waters;
b) To detect the infractions that are committed, define the responsibility that derives, dispose of the corresponding corrective measures and the deadline to comply with them;
c) To contribute to the strengthening of social, administrative, and technical discipline; and
d) To instruct the inspected parties about the content and scope of the legal provisions on terrestrial waters.

ARTICLE 125. The subjects of the state inspection are obliged with respect to the inspection or re-inspection to:
a) Permit its execution;
b) Facilitate its due development, cooperating at all times with the inspector; and,
c) Supply the information requested.

ARTICLE 126. When situations of danger or damage to the hydraulic heritage are detected, the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources may order, in accordance with what is established in this Law, the paralysis of the processes or activities and the total or partial closure of the facilities.

TITLE XIII
REGISTRY OF TERRESTRIAL WATERS

ARTICLE 127.1. The Registry of Terrestrial Waters, under the responsibility of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, is public, and in it are inscribed the legal acts or facts related to the granting of concessions and authorizations and those that modify, transmit, or cancel them.

2. The following are also subject to inscription in the Registry:
a) Acts related to hydraulic infrastructure;
b) Administrative provisions that establish protection zones for surface water bodies, underground sources, and recharge areas that, due to their importance, require it, according to current standards;
c) The well-founded provisions issued by the President of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources that declare surface or underground water bodies overexploited or contaminated or at risk of being so, and the flood zones; and
d) Other acts that are established in the Regulations of this Law.

3. The Registry of Terrestrial Waters has a declarative character.

SPECIAL PROVISIONS

FIRST: The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources presents to the Ministry of Finance and Prices for its approval the proposals for budgetary financing and tariffs, as appropriate.

SECOND: The ministries of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and of the Interior adapt, as necessary, the application of the provisions established in this Law.

TRANSITORY PROVISION

FIRST: The entities that currently provide drinking water and sanitation services in the different territories of the country maintain those responsibilities until the business structures that will assume these functions are established.

SECOND: The natural or legal persons who currently carry out the activities described in Article 51, section 1 of this Law, are obliged to submit their authorization requests, in accordance with what is established in its Regulations and complementary provisions, within a period of one year, counted from the entry into force of this Law and its Regulations.

FINAL PROVISIONS

FIRST: To empower the Council of Ministers to issue the Regulations of this Law within a period of sixty (60) days after its approval.

SECOND: To modify Article 97 of Law No. 81 "On the Environment" of July 11, 1997, which is now worded as follows:
"Article 97: The National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, in coordination with the local organs of People's Power, other organisms of the Central State Administration, and competent national entities, is in charge of the control and development of the actions aimed at the management of terrestrial waters."

THIRD: To repeal Decree-Law No. 138, "Of Terrestrial Waters," of July 1, 1993.

FOURTH: To annul Agreement No. 7140 of the Executive Committee of the Council of Ministers of December 6, 2011.

FIFTH: The glossary of terms attached to this Law, for its better understanding, forms part of its content.

SIXTH: This Law shall enter into force ninety days after its publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Cuba.

BE IT PUBLISHED in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Cuba.

GIVEN in the Session Hall of the National Assembly of People's Power, Palace of Conventions, in Havana, on the fourteenth day of the month of July, two thousand seventeen.

ANNEX
GLOSSARY OF TERMS

1. Access to drinking water: (Article 3.1., paragraph a)): access to drinking water, according to technical possibilities, is provided in the following ways:
a) Intra-domiciliary aqueduct service: the entity that provides the service delivers drinking water at the user's property line, predominantly in the urban sector.
b) Easy access aqueduct service: water delivery is carried out at a distance no greater than three hundred (300) meters from the user's property line, predominantly in rural areas.
c) Drinking water distribution service by tanker trucks or other means of transport authorized by the competent authority, used in places lacking the services related in the previous paragraphs, when temporary interruptions of these occur or in disaster situations.

2. Hydrological actions for the protection of terrestrial waters: (Article 67.1.): These are hydrological actions for the protection of terrestrial waters, among others:
a) The establishment of protection zones around water bodies, underground sources, and recharge areas that require it.
b) The declaration of surface and underground water bodies as overexploited or at risk of being so and those contaminated or in the process of contamination.
c) The approval and supervision of the regularization program for the previously indicated hydrological actions.

3. Aquifer (Articles 15.2 and 65, paragraph b)): a body of groundwater that constitutes a geological formation where water is stored in its pores, cracks, and caverns and which, being permeable, allows its internal movement and can be extracted in economically and socially usable quantities.

4. Drinking water (Article 62.4.): that which is suitable for human consumption in accordance with the current technical standard.

5. Reused water (Article 88.1.): for the purposes of this Law, water is understood to be reused when it is used again in one or more successive activities different from the initial authorized destination.

6. Groundwater (Article 15.1., paragraph b)): that contained in groundwater bodies, aquifers, or permeable geological formations that allow its circulation and storage in its pores or cracks and that may or may not emerge.

7. Surface waters (Article 15.1., paragraph a)): those that flow, channeled or not, and those accumulated in deposits located on the earth's surface.

8. Terrestrial waters (Article 1.1.): those found within or upon the Earth's crust, regardless of their physical, chemical, or bacteriological composition, in the space that constitutes the emerged part of the national territory limited by the coastline.

9. Urban pluvial sewerage or drainage (Article 82): is composed of natural open-air channels and sanitation works for the collection, transportation, and final disposal of rainwater, within the urban perimeter.

10. Sanitary sewerage (Article 81): comprises the sanitation works that constitute the system of collection, transportation, treatment, and final disposal of liquid waste.

11. Siltation (Article 32, paragraph a)): accumulation of solid materials that, carried by floods of water or by human action, are deposited in water bodies, compromising their capacity.

12. Water balance (Articles 117 and 119): a stage of the annual planning process for the use of terrestrial waters that allows establishing the relationship between the demand of each user and the availability of the source at the delivery or capture point, in accordance with the priorities consigned in this Law. With the Water Balance, the volume of water to be allocated per source to each user for its use in the different economic and social activities is determined and proposed.

13. Bed (Article 23.2., paragraph a)): a defined natural or artificial channel that contains water in continuous or periodic movement and includes the banks that are floodable during the rainy season. As long as channeling works are not built, the bed is the natural channel.

14. Sanitary flow (Article 45.1.): delivery of water equivalent to the minimum low-flow discharge of the river in natural conditions, which is guaranteed downstream of dams and diversions, with a priority character in the use of water, except when it may affect human and animal consumption.

15. Ecological flow (Article 45.3.): consists of the discharge downstream of dams and diversions, necessary to maintain the ecosystem functions of the current and the conditions of biodiversity.

16. National Council of Hydrographic Basins (Article 12.1.): an organ chaired by the highest authority of the National Institute of Hydraulic Resources, in charge of coordinating, controlling, and promoting the implementation of integrated management in the hydrographic basins. Its fundamental axis is water and its protection in quantity and quality. Participating in it, within their competence, are local organs of People's Power, organisms of the Central State Administration, and national entities with responsibilities, interests, and activities in the basins.

17. Hydrographic basin (Article 8.1.): a geographical area delimited by the divide of surface and underground waters that constitute a water system, which leads them to a main river, lake, infiltration zone, or coast.

18. Groundwater bodies (Article 65, paragraph b)): aquifers. (See 2.- of this Glossary).

19. Surface water bodies (Article 65, paragraph a)): deposits located on the earth's surface such as lagoons, rivers and streams, wetlands, reservoirs, ponds, and canals in which waters accumulate or flow, channeled or not.

20. Overexploited or at-risk surface or groundwater body (Article 72.2.): those in which the level of the waters they contain is lower than the critical level or very close to it for the time of year in question.

21. Contaminated surface and groundwater bodies (Article 74.): It is considered that surface and groundwater bodies are contaminated when:
- Their waters contain materials, physical alterations, forms of energy, or conditions that imply changes detrimental to their uses or ecological function.
- A deterioration of the original quality of the groundwater occurs due to the increase in its salinity due to overexploitation, coastal flooding, or the rise of the sea level, or due to inadequate practices in water management, a product of the lack of drainage and sub-exploitation.

22. Sources (Article 23.2, paragraph b)): the natural or artificial bodies of surface or groundwater from which supply to users is generated or can be generated.

23. Integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters (Article 1.2.): is the process of coordinated evaluation, planning, use, and protection of this element, the land, and related resources, to maximize economic and social well-being, without compromising the health or conservation of vital ecosystems.

24. Wetlands (Article 66.1.): ecosystems closely linked with terrestrial waters such as river mouths, estuaries, and deltas, swamps, marshes, and mangroves, which constitute a biodiversity habitat and perform hydrological and ecological functions related to the storage and natural control of water quality and the regulation of the local climate.

25. Hydraulic infrastructure (Article 28): are considered works of hydraulic infrastructure, those intended for:
a) The observation of the hydrological cycle and water quality;
b) The capture, extraction, desalination, storage, regulation, conduction, control, and measurement of water use;
c) The protection against floods, the rectification of channels and correction of the flow regime, the artificial recharge of aquifers, and any other purpose aimed at the integrated and sustainable management of terrestrial waters;
d) The water supply to cities, towns, communities, and social objectives;
e) The water supply for animal use;
f) The collection, conduction, treatment, and reuse of wastewater, and urban pluvial drainage systems;
g) Aquaculture and shrimp farming in ponds;
h) The use of hydraulic energy;
i) Irrigation and drainage;
j) The supply to industry and other economic objectives;
k) The canalizations of the coastline towards land;
l) The canalizations or drainage of marshes, estuaries, or wetlands; and
m) The modification of the static level of aquifers.

26. Allocation plan (Article 120): the Allocation Plan is inscribed in the process of using terrestrial waters and once approved, as part of the annual plan of the national economy, is the basic tool for the operation of the sources and a guarantee of water delivery to the user in accordance with the activity they carry out. The annual volume of water allocated and its distribution are the basis for the establishment of the contractual relationship between the user and the one who provides the service.

27. National Hydraulic Plan (Articles 113 and 115): is part of the country's Economic and Social Development Plan and constitutes the fundamental instrument for the planning of the use of terrestrial waters, which materializes Hydraulic Planning.

28. Hydraulic Planning (Article 111): is the instrument of hydraulic planning whose preparation is based on comprehensive technical-economic studies and territorial scope schemes, in which the strategies for the rational and sustainable use of terrestrial waters are determined, in function of the development of the economy, society, and the protection of the environment; as well as the necessary hydraulic infrastructure for it.