Issuer:
Type of act:
Type of text:
Date of entry into force of the version:
End of validity of the version:
Publication notice:
Riigikogu
act
consolidated text
01.01.2020
06.05.2020
RT I, 21.12.2019, 17
Water Act¹
Amended by the following acts
Adopted
04.12.2019
Adopted 30.01.2019
RT I, 22.02.2019, 1
entry into force 01.10.2019
Published
RT I, 21.12.2019, 1
Entry into force
01.01.2020
Chapter 1
General Provisions
§ 1. Scope and area of application of the Act
(1) This Act provides for:
1) the bases for the planning and organisation of water use and protection, the implementation of which promotes the sustainable use of water;
2) water protection requirements that ensure the long-term protection of water resources;
3) the rights, obligations and liability of persons in using water;
4) state supervision over compliance with the requirements for water use and protection;
5) liability for the violation of the requirements provided for in this Act.
(2) The provisions concerning water protection and construction in a public water body in Chapter 8 of this Act shall also extend to the exclusive economic zone, and the provisions concerning the protection of the marine environment shall also extend to vessels and aircraft registered in Estonia outside the Estonian maritime area.
§ 2. Application of the Administrative Procedure Act and the General Part of the Environmental Code Act
(1) The Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to the administrative procedure provided for in this Act, taking into account the exceptions provided for in this Act.
(2) The provisions of Chapter 5 of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act shall apply to the procedure for issuing an environmental permit for the special use of water (hereinafter *water permit*) provided for in this Act, taking into account the exceptions provided for in this Act.
§ 3. Water body
(1) A water body is a permanent or temporary depression filled with flowing, slow-moving or standing water, such as a river, stream, impounded lake, spring, main ditch, canal, lake or sea. A water body is also a main watercourse of a land improvement system within the meaning of the Land Improvement Act.
(2) A canal through which water is directed to a drinking water intake or which has a catchment area of ten square kilometres or more shall be considered a water body.
(3) An artificial lake with a water mirror area of one hectare or more shall also be considered a water body.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, the following shall not be considered water bodies:
1) biological ponds of a wastewater treatment plant;
2) a water pipe and a ditch through which wastewater, storm water and mine water are directed to a water body;
3) a constructed wetland;
4) a pond and a basin established for aquaculture and the water pipes serving them;
Water Act
Page 1 / 72
5) storm water collection systems;
6) an artificial water body with a water mirror area of less than one hectare, created as a result of the extraction of a mineral resource or earth material;
7) other constructions similar to the aforementioned facilities, permanently or temporarily filled with water, established by a person for a specific purpose, such as a boat canal.
§ 4. Inland water body
An inland water body is a water body that is not crossed by the state border.
§ 5. Surface water
Surface water is inland water, except for groundwater, and transitional water, coastal water and, for the assessment of chemical status, also territorial sea.
§ 6. Inland water
Inland water is standing or flowing water on the land surface and groundwater on the landward side of the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.
§ 7. Groundwater
Groundwater is all water which is below the surface of the ground in the saturation zone and in direct contact with the ground or subsoil.
§ 8. Transitional water
Transitional water is surface water in the vicinity of a river mouth which is partly saline as a result of its proximity to the sea, but which is substantially influenced by the inflow of fresh water.
§ 9. Coastal water
Coastal water is sea water on the landward side of a line every point of which is at a distance of one nautical mile on the seaward side from the nearest point of the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured, and which extends, where transitional water is present, to the outer limit of the transitional water.
§ 10. Artificial water body
An artificial water body is a water body created as a result of human activity.
§ 11. Body of surface water
A body of surface water is a discrete and significant element of surface water such as a lake, a river, a stream, an impounded lake, a main ditch, a canal, a ditch or part thereof, transitional water or a part of coastal water.
§ 12. Body of groundwater
A body of groundwater is a distinct volume of water within an aquifer or aquifers.
§ 13. Artificial body of water
An artificial body of water is a body of surface water which has been designated as an artificial water body in accordance with the procedure provided for in this Act.
§ 14. Heavily modified body of water
A heavily modified body of water is a body of surface water which has been designated as a heavily modified body of water in accordance with the procedure provided for in this Act.
§ 15. Aquifer
An aquifer is one or more underground layers of rock or other geological strata of sufficient porosity and permeability to allow either a significant flow of groundwater or the abstraction of significant quantities of water.
§ 16. Water intake
A water intake is a structure for abstracting water from a water body or aquifer.
Page 2 / 72
Water Act
§ 17. Drinking water
(1) Drinking water for the purposes of this Act is water in its original state or treated, intended for drinking, cooking, food preparation or other domestic purposes, regardless of its origin and whether it is supplied to consumers through a distribution network, from a tanker, in bottles or in containers.
(2) Drinking water shall also be considered to be water which any food business operator within the meaning of Article 3(3) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (OJ L 31, 01.02.2002, pp. 1–24) uses for the manufacture, processing, preservation or marketing of products or substances intended for human consumption, unless the Veterinary and Food Board has established that the quality of the water cannot affect the safety of the foodstuff in its finished form.
§ 18. Wastewater
(1) Wastewater is water that has been in use and is discharged into a receiving body.
(2) Wastewater shall not be considered to be storm water, mine water, quarry water, cooling water, water flowing in a land improvement system, or water used in aquaculture and hydropower production.
§ 19. Receiving body
A receiving body for the purposes of this Act is a water body, part of a water body or part of the subsoil into which wastewater or pollutants are discharged.
§ 20. Sewage
Sewage is water generated in households, industry or other production, which exceeds the established emission limit values and which must be treated before being discharged into a receiving body. Sewage shall also be considered to be storm water discharged into a combined sewerage system.
§ 21. Pollution
Pollution for the purposes of this Act is, in addition to that provided for in § 7(5) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act, a significant adverse change in aquatic life or in the terrestrial life associated with water.
§ 22. Pollutant
A pollutant for the purposes of this Act is a substance which may cause pollution or the presence of which in water may be accompanied by an environmental nuisance within the meaning of § 3(1) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act.
§ 23. Public water bodies
(1) The public water bodies are:
1) the internal sea;
2) the territorial sea;
3) Lake Peipsi;
4) Lake Võrtsjärv;
5) Mullutu Bay;
6) Suurlaht Bay;
7) the Narva reservoir;
8) the Narva River;
9) the Emajõgi River;
10) the Nasva River;
11) the Väike Emajõgi River from the Jõgeveste bridge to Lake Võrtsjärv;
12) the Kasari River from the mouth of the Vigala River to its mouth in the sea.
(2) Public water bodies belong to the state and are not in civil circulation.
§ 24. Publicly used water bodies
(1) The list of publicly used water bodies shall be established by an order of the Government of the Republic.
(2) The following shall not be included in the list of publicly used water bodies:
1) a body of standing water without an outflow located within one immovable, belonging to a private person;
2) a body of standing water without an outflow located within several immovables, belonging to a private person, with an area of less than five hectares;
3) a flowing water body with a catchment area of less than 25 square kilometres, and an impounded lake located on it;
Water Act
Page 3 / 72
4) a body of standing water or part thereof located in a training area of the Defence Forces and the Defence League;
5) a water body or part thereof used for the abstraction of drinking water;
6) a water body or part thereof located on a mining claim granted for the extraction of a mineral resource or in its service area;
7) a part of a water body where aquaculture is practised.
(3) In the event of a natural disaster, the public use of a water body in the affected area is permitted.
(4) In order to ensure human health and safety, a local government unit may temporarily restrict the public use of a publicly used water body or part thereof within its administrative territory, after having coordinated the restriction in writing with the Environmental Board and, in addition, with the Transport Administration if water sports or water traffic are restricted.
(5) A local government unit shall publish a notice of the temporary restriction of the public use of a publicly used water body in a local or county newspaper and, if possible, in other local mass media at least one week before the temporary restriction is established.
(6) The notice shall state at least the name and location of the publicly used water body whose public use is restricted, the period of validity of the restriction, and the reason for establishing the restriction and, if necessary, the conditions. If the public use of a part of the water body is restricted, in addition to the said information, the notice shall state the size of the restricted area and, if possible, the exact boundaries or at least the size of the restricted area, and shall indicate the place where the map of the boundaries of the restricted area or a precise description of the boundaries can be consulted.
(7) The Ministry of Defence or a structural unit of the Defence Forces or the Defence League authorised by it may restrict the use of a publicly used flowing water body or part thereof located in a training area of the Defence Forces and the Defence League during tactical exercises, training, firing and demolition work, and testing of weapons, ammunition, combat and other equipment by units of the Defence Forces and the Defence League. The provisions of subsections 5 and 6 of this section shall apply to the requirements for the publication of the relevant notice and the content of the notice.
§ 25. Exclusion of a water body from public use
The Government of the Republic may, on the basis of a reasoned application by the owner of an immovable and with the written consent of the local government unit, exclude a body of standing water with an outflow or a part of a flowing water body belonging to a private person located within one immovable from the list of publicly used water bodies.
Chapter 2
Planning and Organisation of Water Use and Protection
Division 1
General Provisions
§ 26. Catchment-based planning and organisation of water use and protection
(1) The use and protection of surface water and groundwater shall be planned and organised on a catchment basis by river basin districts, taking into account the hydrological boundaries of the catchments of water bodies.
(2) A catchment for the purposes of this Act is an area of land from which all flowing surface water flows through rivers, streams, impounded lakes, main ditches, canals or lakes to a single river mouth into the sea.
(3) A river basin district for the purposes of this Act is an area of land and sea, consisting of one or more adjacent catchments together with groundwater and coastal water, which is the main unit for the management of water use and protection.
§ 27. River basin districts
The following are river basin districts in Estonia:
1) the West Estonia river basin district;
2) the East Estonia river basin district;
3) the Koiva river basin district.
§ 28. Combined approach principle for the limitation of point and diffuse source emissions
(1) The regulation of the discharge of pollutants into surface water shall be based on a combined approach, according to which the discharge of pollutants into surface water is avoided or limited at their source through the implementation of environmental requirements, including the best environmental practice, the best available techniques and the best existing measures, the establishment and implementation of environmental quality limit values (hereinafter *quality standard* or *quality standards*) and emission limit values. If, despite compliance with environmental requirements, it is not possible to achieve the environmental objectives set out in this Act, additional measures provided for by law shall be implemented, including, where necessary, stricter environmental requirements, emission limit values and quality standards.
Page 4 / 72
Water Act
(2) The combined approach principle shall be taken into account in limiting both point and diffuse source emissions.
§ 29. Principle of recovery of the costs of water services
(1) In the pricing of water services and the planning of water use, it shall be taken into account that consumers of water services and other water users, in particular industry, households and agriculture, shall cover the costs associated with the provision of water services to an extent that encourages the efficient use of water, based on the results of the economic analysis of water use referred to in § 44(1) of this Act, the social impact of cost recovery, the impact on the environment and the economy, and the geographical and climatic specificities of the region concerned.
(2) Water use for the purposes of subsection 1 of this section includes water services, including the activity referred to in § 187 of this Act, which has a significant impact on the status of water.
(3) Water services for the purposes of this Act are all services provided to households, state and local government authorities, public and private legal persons and natural persons, such as the abstraction, impoundment, storage, treatment and distribution of surface water or groundwater, and the collection and treatment of sewage and its discharge into a receiving body.
(4) For the implementation of the principle of recovery of the costs of water services, account shall be kept of the environmental and resource costs in the fields of industry, households and agriculture.
§ 30. Cooperation in transboundary river basin districts
(1) In matters concerning transboundary river basin districts located in the territory of the Republic of Estonia and the Russian Federation, cooperation shall be carried out on the basis of this Act and an international agreement in order to achieve the water protection objectives in the part of the transboundary river basin district located in Estonia.
(2) A river basin district consisting of a catchment area that crosses a state border is a transboundary river basin district.
(3) Water protection in transboundary river basin districts shall be organised in accordance with the international agreements of the Republic of Estonia.
(4) In the exchange of information and coordination of documents related to a transboundary river basin district in the cases provided for in this Act, the relevant information and documents shall be forwarded to the competent authority of the foreign state by the Ministry of the Environment.
Division 2
Water Protection Objectives and Derogations for their Achievement
Section 1
Water Protection Objectives
§ 31. General water protection objectives
(1) The general water protection objectives are:
1) to reduce the impact of human activity on the water environment;
2) to prevent the deterioration of the status of aquatic ecosystems, terrestrial ecosystems and wetlands dependent on them, and to improve their status;
3) to promote the sustainable use of water and to ensure the long-term protection and sufficient supply of surface water and groundwater resources;
4) to cease the discharge of priority hazardous substances and to limit the discharge of pollutants, including other hazardous substances, into the water environment;
5) to contribute to mitigating the effects of floods and droughts;
6) to achieve good environmental status of the marine area.
(2) If more than one water protection objective applies to a body of water at the same time, the most stringent of them shall be applied.
§ 32. Surface water protection objective
(1) The objective of surface water protection is at least a good status of bodies of surface water, including artificial bodies of water, heavily modified bodies of water and water bodies not covered by a body of surface water, including the territorial sea.
Water Act
Page 5 / 72
(2) The status of a body of surface water is good if its ecological and chemical status is at least good in accordance with the values of the quality indicators established on the basis of § 61(2) and the quality standards established on the basis of § 76(1) of this Act.
(3) The status of an artificial body of water and a heavily modified body of water is good if their ecological potential and chemical status are at least good in accordance with the values of the quality indicators established on the basis of § 61(2) and the quality standards established on the basis of § 76(1) of this Act.
(4) Surface water in areas requiring protection within the meaning of clauses 2 and 5 of § 36(1) of this Act must comply with the requirements established on the basis of § 36(6) and the Nature Conservation Act.
(5) The status of water bodies not covered by a body of surface water, including the territorial sea, is good if the quality standards established on the basis of § 76(1) of this Act are not exceeded in the water and the water body, excluding the territorial sea, corresponds to the values of the quality indicators established on the basis of § 61(4).
§ 33. Achievement of the surface water protection objective
(1) The deterioration of the ecological and chemical status of bodies of surface water must be prevented.
(2) The deterioration of the ecological potential and chemical status of artificial bodies of water and heavily modified bodies of water must be prevented.
(3) In water bodies not covered by a body of surface water, the exceeding of the limit values of priority substances, priority hazardous substances, certain other pollutants and river basin specific pollutants and the deterioration of the quality indicators necessary for water use and the protection of biota must be prevented.
§ 34. Groundwater protection objective
(1) The groundwater protection objective is a good status of bodies of groundwater.
(2) The status of a body of groundwater is good if its chemical and quantitative status is good in accordance with the values of the quality indicators established on the basis of § 66(6), the indicators used for determining the quantitative status, and the threshold values established on the basis of § 77(4) of this Act.
(3) The groundwater protection objective not covered by a body of groundwater is to ensure that the quality indicators of groundwater correspond to the values of the quality indicators, threshold values and quality standards established on the basis of § 66(6), § 77(4) and § 79(3) of this Act, taking into account the requirements for the most similar body of groundwater and the background level of natural substances in the groundwater.
§ 35. Achievement of the groundwater protection objective
(1) The deterioration of the chemical and quantitative status of bodies of groundwater must be prevented.
(2) The pollutant content in a body of groundwater must be reduced and a significant and sustained increase in the pollutant content must be prevented.
(3) In the planning of groundwater use and protection, the natural resource of groundwater must be taken into account, a balance between groundwater abstraction and recovery must be ensured, and the over-abstraction of groundwater must be prevented.
(4) The natural resource of groundwater is the average long-term annual recharge of a body of groundwater, from which is subtracted the long-term annual flow required to achieve good ecological status of surface water associated with groundwater, to avoid significant deterioration in the ecological status of surface water and to avoid significant damage to terrestrial ecosystems dependent on groundwater.
(5) In the planning of measures to prevent the over-abstraction of groundwater, the data of water monitoring and the natural resource of groundwater entered in the relevant register and the groundwater reserve established on the basis of § 205(1) of this Act shall be taken into account.
§ 36. Area requiring protection
(1) An area requiring protection is:
1) a nitrate vulnerable zone, including an area with unprotected groundwater on limestone and karst areas with a surface cover thickness of up to two metres, and important springs and karst funnels requiring protection (hereinafter *important springs and karst funnels*);
2) an area designated for the protection of economically significant aquatic species;
3) the sanitary protection zone of this water intake and the recharge area of its drinking water intake, which is used for the abstraction of drinking water and whose design water abstraction per day is more than 10 cubic metres or which serves more than 50 people;
4) the sanitary protection zone of this water intake and the recharge area of its drinking water intake, which is intended to be used for the purpose mentioned in clause 3 of this subsection;
5) an area designated under the Nature Conservation Act for the protection of a habitat or a species, where the maintenance or improvement of the status of water is an important factor for its protection, including a water body as a habitat for salmonids and cyprinids;
Page 6 / 72
6) an area intended for recreational purposes, including bathing places and bathing beaches;
7) receiving bodies vulnerable to wastewater.
(2) In an area requiring protection, quality requirements stricter than the objectives set out in §§ 32 and 34 of this Act apply or activities are restricted in accordance with this Act.
(3) The Estonian territorial sea, coastal water, inland water bodies and transboundary water bodies belonging to Estonia are receiving bodies vulnerable to wastewater.
(4) A transboundary water body for the purposes of this Act is a water body along which the state border runs.
(5) In the sanitary protection zone of a water intake mentioned in clauses 3 and 4 of subsection 1 of this section and, where necessary, also in the recharge area of a drinking water intake, the deterioration of the quality of surface water and groundwater to an extent that may lead to a significant increase in the costs of water treatment for the production of drinking water must be prevented.
(6) The minister responsible for the area shall establish, by a regulation, the areas for the protection of economically significant aquatic species and the values of water quality indicators and quality standards in these areas, where necessary.
(7) Areas requiring protection mentioned in subsection 1 of this section shall be recorded in the relevant register.
§ 37. Nitrate vulnerable zone
(1) A nitrate vulnerable zone is an area where agricultural activity has caused or may cause a nitrate concentration in groundwater exceeding 50 milligrams per litre, or where agricultural activity has caused or poses a risk of eutrophication of a water body.
(2) The Government of the Republic shall, by a regulation, determine the nitrate vulnerable zone and, within its limits, the limestone and karst areas with unprotected groundwater with a surface cover thickness of up to two metres, and shall establish a list of important springs and karst funnels requiring protection within the nitrate vulnerable zone.
Section 2
Derogations for the Achievement of Water Protection Objectives
§ 38. Application of derogations for the achievement of water protection objectives
(1) Derogations for the achievement of good status of a body of water may be applied on the basis of §§ 39–42 of this Act. The justifications for the application of derogations shall be presented by body of water in the river basin management plan and, where appropriate, in a water permit or an integrated environmental permit (hereinafter *integrated permit*).
(2) In the application of the derogations referred to in subsection 1 of this section, it must be ensured that:
1) they do not impede the achievement of good status in other bodies of water in the river basin district;
2) all other quality and environmental requirements established in or on the basis of this Act are applied to these bodies of water;
3) these bodies of water are protected at least at the level provided for in other Estonian and European Union legislation.
(3) The application of the derogations referred to in subsection 1 of this section shall be reviewed when updating the river basin management plan at least once every six years.
(4) Data on the derogations applied for the achievement of good status of bodies of water shall be kept in the relevant register.
§ 39. Extension of the deadline for the achievement of a water protection objective
(1) The deadline for the achievement of a water protection objective set out in this Act may be extended and the achievement of the objective may be planned step by step, provided that the status of the body of water does not deteriorate, and if at least one of the following reasons exists:
1) the implementation of the measures is technically feasible only in stages and lasts longer than the deadline for achieving the objective;
2) the implementation of the measures within the deadline involves disproportionately high costs;
3) it is not possible to achieve the objective within the deadline due to natural conditions.
(2) The deadline for the achievement of a water protection objective may be extended again when updating the river basin management plan until the end of the period for which the updated river basin management plan is prepared, except where it is not possible to achieve the objective related to the body of water by that time due to natural conditions.
Water Act
Page 7 / 72
(3) The extension of the deadline for the achievement of the water protection objective and its justification, the measures to be implemented for the step-by-step achievement of the objective, the timetable for the implementation of the measures and the justification for the significant delay in the implementation of the measures shall be presented in the river basin management plan.
§ 40. Setting a less stringent water protection objective
(1) A less stringent objective than the water protection objective set out in this Act may be set for a body of water only if the status of the body of water is so poor due to natural conditions or the impact of human activity identified in accordance with § 44 of this Act that achieving the objective is impossible or possible at a disproportionately high cost, and if:
1) the environmental or socio-economic benefits derived from human activity cannot be obtained by other means which are more environmentally friendly and cost-effective;
2) the achievement of the best possible ecological and chemical status of the body of surface water is ensured, taking into account the impact of human activity that cannot be reasonably avoided;
3) the possible changes in the good status of the body of groundwater are minimal, taking into account the impact which cannot be reasonably prevented due to the nature of human activity or pollution;
4) it is ensured that the status of the body of water does not deteriorate.
(2) The less stringent water protection objectives and their justifications shall be presented in the river basin management plan and shall be reviewed again when updating the river basin management plan.
§ 41. Temporary deterioration of the status of a body of water
(1) Temporary deterioration of the status of a body of water, which is due to exceptional or unforeseeable circumstances, such as natural conditions, force majeure or an accident, shall not be taken into account in the achievement of the water protection objective if all the following conditions are met:
1) measures have been taken to prevent further deterioration of the status of the body of water, and regardless of the exceptional or unforeseeable circumstances, the work to achieve the water protection objective of the body of water is continued;
2) the conditions for recognising a situation as exceptional or unforeseeable and the quality indicators applicable in such cases are indicated in the river basin management plan;
3) the programme of measures of the river basin management plan indicates the measures to be implemented in the event of exceptional and unforeseeable circumstances, which do not impede the restoration of the status of the body of water after these circumstances have passed.
(2) The impact of the circumstances referred to in subsection 1 of this section shall be assessed anew each year, and measures shall be planned and implemented, taking into account the reasons referred to in § 39(1) of this Act, for the restoration of the status of the body of water preceding the occurrence of these circumstances as quickly as possible.
(3) When updating the river basin management plan, a summary of the circumstances referred to in subsection 1 of this section and the impact of the measures planned and implemented so far shall be presented in the river basin management plan.
§ 42. Failure to achieve a water protection objective due to changes in the water level of a body of groundwater or new physical modifications to a body of surface water or due to new sustainable development activities
(1) If the good status of a body of groundwater, the good ecological status of a body of surface water or the good ecological potential of a heavily modified body of water or an artificial body of water is not achieved or the deterioration of the status or potential cannot be prevented due to a change in the water level of the body of groundwater or due to new physical modifications to the body of surface water, or if the status of the body of surface water falls from very good to good due to new sustainable development activities, the water protection objective shall be deemed to have been achieved if all the following conditions are met:
1) all appropriate measures have been taken to mitigate the adverse impact on the status of the body of water;
2) the reasons for the said modifications are described in the river basin management plan and the water protection objective is reviewed every six years;
3) the reasons for the said modifications are of overriding public interest or the benefits to human health, safety or sustainable development resulting from these modifications outweigh the general environmental benefits and public interest associated with achieving the water protection objective;
4) the benefit resulting from the modifications cannot be achieved by other means which would be significantly better from an environmental point of view due to technical feasibility or disproportionately high costs.
(2) If the application of the derogation provided for in subsection 1 of this section is not determined in the river basin management plan, the information referred to in clause 3 of subsection 1 of this section shall be presented in the water permit or integrated permit deciding on the application of the derogation and in the river basin management plan at its next update.
Division 3
River Basin Management Plans
Section 1
Water Act
Page 8 / 72
River Basin Management Plan and Supplementary Plan thereto
§ 43. River Basin Management Plan
(1) In order to achieve the water protection objectives set out in section 1 of division 2 of this Chapter, a river basin management plan shall be prepared for each river basin district or part of a transboundary river basin district located in Estonia, in which the use and protection of water in the river basin district or part of a transboundary river basin district located in Estonia shall be planned.
(2) For the organisation of water use and protection and for integration with other areas, the minister responsible for the area shall, by a directive, form a river basin management commission.
(3) The statutes of the river basin management commission shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) The requirements for the content of the river basin management plan shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 44. Overview of the characteristics of the river basin district and the impact of human activity on the river basin district, and economic analysis of water use
(1) The characteristics of each river basin district and part of a transboundary river basin district located in Estonia shall be analysed in accordance with Annex II of Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, pp. 1–73), and an overview of the pressures caused by human activity on the surface water and groundwater of the relevant river basin district shall be prepared, and in accordance with Annex III, an economic analysis of water use shall be carried out.
(2) The results of the analyses and the overview mentioned in subsection 1 of this section shall be reviewed and updated at least two years before the end of the river basin management plan period.
(3) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the carrying out of the analyses mentioned in subsection 1 of this section and the preparation and updating of the overviews.
§ 45. Supplementary plan to the river basin management plan
(1) To supplement or specify the river basin management plan, a supplementary plan may be prepared for a river basin district or part thereof, for the field of surface water, groundwater, coastal water, coastal area, sea water, water use, other activity affecting the status of water, pressure source, emission source or type thereof, or for the organisation of a specific water management issue.
(2) To reduce the environmental risk arising from agricultural production to surface water and groundwater, an action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone shall be prepared.
(3) The supplementary plan to the river basin management plan, including the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone, shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) The minister responsible for the area may, by a regulation, establish requirements for the content of the supplementary plan to the river basin management plan, including the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone.
Section 2
Programme of Measures
§ 46. Programme of Measures
(1) The programme of measures shall plan measures for the implementation of the water protection principles set out in this Act and for the achievement of the water protection objectives set out in section 1 of division 2 of this Chapter in the river basin district or part of a transboundary river basin district located in Estonia.
(2) The measures planned in the programme of measures must be taken into account when preparing, updating and amending the national development plan, the county development strategy and the development plan of a local government unit, including the plan for the development of public water supply and sewerage of a local government unit, plans under the Planning Act and other plans related to water use and protection.
(3) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the preparation of the programme of measures, taking into account the provisions of §§ 48 and 49 of this Act.
(4) The requirements for the content of the programme of measures shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Water Act
Page 9 / 72
§ 47. Implementation of additional measures
(1) If it becomes apparent that the measures presented in the programme of measures are not sufficient to achieve the water protection objectives, the competent administrative body is obliged to implement additional measures, including:
1) establishing stricter quality standards and values of quality indicators;
2) setting stricter emission limit values.
(2) Stricter quality standards and values of quality indicators shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(3) Stricter emission limit values shall be set by a water permit or an integrated permit.
(4) The additional measures under subsection 1 of this section need not be implemented if the conditions set out in clauses 1 and 2 of § 42(1) of this Act are met and the likely failure to achieve the water protection objective is due to natural conditions or force majeure which were exceptional and could not have been foreseen.
Section 3
Procedure for the Preparation of a River Basin Management Plan and Supplementary Plans thereto, Coordination and Organisation of Implementation, Procedure for the Preparation of a Programme of Measures and Water Monitoring Programme of a River Basin District
§ 48. Procedure for the preparation of a river basin management plan
(1) The provisions of the open procedure of the Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to the procedure for the preparation of a river basin management plan, taking into account the exceptions provided for in this Act.
(2) The preparation of the river basin management plan shall be initiated by the minister responsible for the area. The Ministry of the Environment shall publish a notice of the initiation of the preparation of the river basin management plan in the Official Gazette and in a national daily newspaper within one month of the date of making the relevant decision.
(3) The Ministry of the Environment shall introduce the objectives of the river basin management plan in a national daily newspaper within two months of the date of making the decision to initiate the preparation of the river basin management plan.
(4) The local government units, residents and interest groups located in the territory of the river basin district shall be involved in the preparation of the river basin management plan. The Environmental Board shall organise the involvement.
(5) For public involvement, the Ministry of the Environment shall prepare and make available to the public:
1) at least three years before the beginning of the period covered by the river basin management plan, a timetable and work plan for the preparation of the river basin management plan, which includes public involvement measures;
2) at least two years before the beginning of the period covered by the river basin management plan, an overview of significant water management issues, which includes a summary of the results of the economic analysis of water use and a summary of the results of the river basin district's water monitoring programme;
3) at least two years before the beginning of the period covered by the river basin management plan, a flood risk assessment report and maps of flood risk areas and flood hazard areas;
4) at least one year before the beginning of the period covered by the river basin management plan, a draft river basin management plan.
(6) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the public display of the documents mentioned in subsection 5 of this section and the documents and information used for their preparation in the territory of the river basin district and shall publish them on the website of the Ministry of the Environment. The duration of the public display of the said documents shall be six months. Public hearings shall be organised during the public display period. The time and place of the public display and the deadline for submitting proposals shall be announced in the Official Gazette and in a national daily newspaper.
(7) The draft river basin management plan shall be coordinated within 20 working days before the public display with the ministries whose area of government the river basin management plan concerns, and with the local government units located in the territory of the river basin district.
(8) During the public display period, everyone has the right to submit proposals and objections concerning the documents mentioned in subsection 5 of this section. The Ministry of the Environment shall respond to the submitted written proposals and objections in writing within two months after the end of the public display period.
(9) On the basis of the results of the public display and hearing, the Ministry of the Environment shall, where necessary, make corrections and additions to the documents mentioned in subsection 5 of this section.
(10) The river basin management plan shall be published on the website of the Ministry of the Environment.
Page 10 / 72
Water Act
§ 49. Updating the river basin management plan
(1) The river basin management plan shall be reviewed and updated where necessary, but not less frequently than every six years from its preparation or updating.
(2) The provisions of § 48 of this Act shall also apply to the updating of the river basin management plan.
(3) The measures of the updated river basin management plan shall be implemented within three years of the date of updating the plan.
§ 50. Procedure for the preparation of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and other supplementary plan to the river basin management plan
(1) The provisions of the open procedure of the Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to the procedure for the preparation of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and other supplementary plan to the river basin management plan, taking into account the exceptions provided for in this Act.
(2) The preparation of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and other supplementary plan to the river basin management plan shall be initiated by the minister responsible for the area. The Ministry of the Environment shall publish a notice of the initiation of the preparation of the action programme in the Official Gazette and in a national daily newspaper within one month of the date of making the relevant decision.
(3) The local government units, representatives of agricultural producers and interest groups located in the nitrate vulnerable zone shall be involved in the preparation of the action programme for the nitrate vulnerable zone.
(4) The local government units, the relevant representative organisations and interest groups located in the area covered by the plan shall be involved in the preparation of the draft of another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan.
(5) Before public display, the draft of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and the draft of another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan shall be coordinated with the ministries whose area of government the action programme concerns.
(6) The draft of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone shall be sent for an opinion to the local government units, representatives of agricultural producers and interest groups located in the nitrate vulnerable zone.
(7) The draft of another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan shall be sent for an opinion to the relevant representative organisations and interest groups.
(8) The time allowed for coordination and giving an opinion must be at least 15 working days.
(9) After the coordination of the draft of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and the draft of another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan or after giving an opinion on it in accordance with subsections 5–8 of this section, it shall be placed on the website of the Ministry of the Environment. The public display period must be at least 30 days. The time and place of the public display and the deadline for submitting proposals shall be announced in the Official Gazette and in a national daily newspaper.
(10) During the public display period, everyone has the right to submit proposals and objections concerning the draft of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and the draft of another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan. The organiser of the preparation of the action programme shall respond to the submitted proposals and objections in writing within two months of the expiry of the deadline for submitting proposals.
(11) The decision to establish the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone or another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan shall be published together with the action programme or other supplementary plan on the website of the Ministry of the Environment.
§ 51. Updating the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone and other supplementary plan to the river basin management plan
(1) The action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone shall be reviewed every four years and, where necessary, updated, based, inter alia, on the results of environmental monitoring and the effectiveness of the implemented measures.
(2) Another supplementary plan to the river basin management plan shall be reviewed and, where necessary, updated, based, inter alia, on the results of environmental monitoring and the effectiveness of the implemented measures.
§ 52. Organisation and coordination of the implementation of the programme of measures and supplementary plans to the river basin management plan
(1) The river basin management commission shall organise the implementation of the programme of measures and the Environmental Board shall coordinate the implementation of the measures.
(2) A local government unit shall, within its competence, organise and ensure the implementation of the measures planned in the programme of measures in its administrative region.
Water Act
Page 11 / 72
(3) To implement the programme of measures, the Environmental Board shall prepare an action plan for the implementation of the programme of measures for each river basin district.
(4) The local government units and interest groups located in the river basin district shall be involved in the preparation of the action plan for the implementation of the programme of measures.
(5) The action plan for the implementation of the programme of measures shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
(6) The Environmental Board shall prepare an overview of the implementation of the programme of measures and submit it to the river basin management commission for approval by 1 May each year.
(7) The overview of the implementation of the programme of measures and the overview of the implementation of the programme of measures approved by the river basin management commission shall be published on the websites of the Ministry of the Environment and the Environmental Board.
(8) The Ministry of the Environment shall coordinate the implementation of the supplementary plan to the river basin management plan.
(9) The Ministry of the Environment shall coordinate the implementation of the action programme for a nitrate vulnerable zone in cooperation with the Ministry of Rural Affairs.
§ 53. Water monitoring programme of a river basin district
(1) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the preparation of a water monitoring programme for each river basin district and part of a transboundary river basin district located in Estonia for the period of validity of the river basin management plan.
(2) The water monitoring programme of a river basin district includes:
1) monitoring of the volume and level or flow of surface water to the extent necessary to assess the ecological status or ecological potential and chemical status of a body of surface water;
2) monitoring of the ecological status or ecological potential and chemical status of bodies of surface water;
3) monitoring of the chemical status of the territorial sea;
4) monitoring of the quantitative and chemical status of bodies of groundwater;
5) additional monitoring of such indicators of areas requiring protection which characterise the compliance of these areas with the objectives for which these areas were placed under protection.
(3) The provisions of §§ 236 and 237 of this Act shall apply to water studies carried out during the implementation of the water monitoring programme of a river basin district.
(4) The water monitoring programme of a river basin district shall be reviewed and updated where necessary.
(5) The content of the water monitoring programme of a river basin district, including the principles, methods and methodology for the preparation of the water monitoring programme, and the requirements for its implementation shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Division 4
Status of Surface Water
§ 54. Delineation of a body of surface water
(1) In a flowing water body, a standing water body, coastal water and transitional water, a body of surface water shall be delineated on the basis of the area of the water body or catchment, taking into account the type of water body, the circumstances of the use of the water body and the water protection objectives, and the specific nature of the origin, development and water regime of the water body or part thereof.
(2) A body of surface water is not delineated for the assessment of the chemical status of the territorial sea.
(3) A body of surface water may be a single complete flowing water body entered in the relevant register with a catchment area of 10 square kilometres or more, or a standing water body or impounded lake with an area of 50 hectares or more, and a part of coastal water or transitional water, regardless of area.
(4) An impounded lake which is located in the main channel of a flowing water body and whose area is less than 50 hectares belongs to the body of surface water of the flowing water body passing through that impounded lake.
(5) The following may be delineated as a single body of surface water in exceptional cases:
1) a part of a water body if it differs from other parts of the water body in terms of origin, development, water regime or natural conditions, or if it has a different type of water body or water protection objective than other parts of the water body, or if it is used differently compared to other parts of the water body;
2) several water bodies whose water systems are interconnected and whose natural water characteristics are similar;
3) a flowing water body with a catchment area of less than 10 square kilometres and a standing water body or impounded lake with an area of less than 50 hectares, if it is located in an area requiring protection mentioned in clauses 2 and 5 of § 36(1) of this Act.
(6) A separate body of surface water is not delineated for a flowing water body with a catchment area of 10–25 square kilometres which flows into a flowing water body, but in which there is not enough water to determine the type-specific characteristics.
Page 12 / 72
Water Act
(7) The list of bodies of surface water shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(8) The list established on the basis of subsection 7 of this section may delineate bodies of surface water on which areas requiring protection mentioned in clauses 2 and 5 of § 36(1) of this Act are located.
(9) The list of bodies of surface water established on the basis of subsection 7 of this section shall be reviewed every six years and, where necessary, updated.
§ 55. Designation of a body of surface water as an artificial water body or a heavily modified water body
(1) A water body or part thereof may be designated as an artificial water body or a heavily modified water body if:
1) modifications to the hydromorphological characteristics caused by human activity do not allow the achievement of good ecological status of the water body and the restoration of the hydromorphological characteristics of the water body would have a significant adverse effect on the environment in a broader sense, would significantly impede navigation, including the use of port facilities, the use of the water body for recreational purposes, the storage of water for irrigation or drinking water or electricity generation, the regulation of the water regime, protection against floods, the functioning of a land improvement system or other significant activity supporting sustainable development;
2) the benefit resulting from the modified characteristics of the water body cannot be achieved for technical reasons or at a disproportionately high cost by other means which are more environmentally friendly.
(2) A water body or part thereof shall be designated as an artificial water body or a heavily modified water body in accordance with subsection 1 of this section in the river basin management plan, where the justification for the designation shall also be presented.
(3) The designation of a water body or part thereof as an artificial water body or a heavily modified water body and its justification shall be reviewed and, where necessary, updated every six years.
§ 56. Assessment of the status of surface water
(1) The status of surface water is assessed on the basis of the status of bodies of surface water and the territorial sea.
(2) In assessing the status of surface water, compliance with quality standards or other values of quality indicators established for a water body not covered by a body of surface water, based on the specific nature of water use or for the protection of biota, shall be taken into account.
§ 57. Status of a body of surface water
(1) The status of a body of surface water shall be determined on the basis of the ecological status or chemical status of the body of surface water, whichever is worse.
(2) The ecological status of a body of surface water characterises the quality of the structure and functioning of aquatic ecosystems and the important physical, chemical and hydromorphological quality indicators for the functioning of aquatic ecosystems.
(3) The chemical status of a body of surface water indicates the content of priority substances, priority hazardous substances and certain other pollutants in the water environment.
§ 58. Status of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body
(1) The status of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body shall be determined on the basis of the ecological potential or chemical status of the water body, based on the most similar type of water body, whichever is worse.
(2) The ecological potential of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body characterises the extent to which the structure and functioning of the ecosystem of that water body correspond to that of the most similar natural body of surface water.
(3) The chemical status of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body indicates the content of priority substances, priority hazardous substances and certain other pollutants in the water environment.
§ 59. Status classes of a body of surface water
(1) The ecological status of a body of surface water is characterised by five status classes:
1) very good;
2) good;
3) moderate;
4) poor;
5) very poor.
Water Act
Page 13 / 72
(2) The chemical status of a body of surface water is characterised by two status classes:
1) good;
2) poor.
(3) If the ecological status class of a body of surface water is very good and the chemical status class is good, the status of the body of water is considered to be very good.
§ 60. Status classes of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body
(1) The ecological potential of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body is characterised by four status classes:
1) very good;
2) good;
3) moderate;
4) poor.
(2) The chemical status of an artificial water body and a heavily modified water body is characterised by two status classes:
1) good;
2) poor.
(3) If the ecological potential status class of an artificial water body or a heavily modified water body is very good and the chemical status class is good, the status of the body of water is considered to be very good.
§ 61. Determination of the status class of a body of surface water and the territorial sea and values of quality indicators for water bodies not covered by a body of surface water
(1) For the determination of the chemical status class of a body of surface water and the territorial sea, the quality standards established on the basis of § 76(1) of this Act and the methods for their application shall be used.
(2) The values of the quality indicators used for determining the ecological status or ecological potential of a body of surface water corresponding to the status classes of bodies of surface water and the procedure for determining the status classes shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(3) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the determination of the status classes of bodies of surface water and the chemical status class of the territorial sea.
(4) The values of the quality indicators necessary for water use and the protection of biota for water bodies not covered by a body of surface water may be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 62. Data on bodies of surface water, the territorial sea, water bodies not covered by a body of surface water and surface water resources
(1) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the collection, storage and publication of the following information on bodies of surface water and the territorial sea:
1) the location and boundaries of bodies of surface water on a map, based on the Estonian Topographic Database;
2) the results of water monitoring and water studies carried out on bodies of surface water and the territorial sea;
3) the status of bodies of surface water and the chemical status of the territorial sea;
4) the pressure affecting the chemical status of bodies of surface water and the territorial sea;
5) the measures implemented to improve the status of bodies of surface water and the chemical status of the territorial sea and their effectiveness;
6) the connection of bodies of surface water and the territorial sea to areas requiring protection;
7) other relevant data related to bodies of surface water and the territorial sea.
(2) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the collection, storage and publication of information on water bodies not covered by a body of surface water.
(3) The records of surface water resources shall be kept in the relevant register on the quantity, level, characteristics, use and users of water, and water intakes.
Division 5
Status of Groundwater
§ 63. Delineation of a body of groundwater
(1) A body of groundwater is delineated from an aquifer if at least one of the following conditions is met:
1) the aquifer has a groundwater reserve established on the basis of § 205(1) of this Act;
2) at least 50 people continuously consume water from the aquifer;
3) at least ten cubic metres of water per day can be or is intended to be abstracted from the aquifer in the future;
4) the natural chemical composition of the groundwater allows the use of groundwater for the production of drinking water.
Page 14 / 72
Water Act
(2) In determining the extent of a body of groundwater, the hydrogeological conditions of the body of groundwater, including the natural chemical composition of the groundwater, the physical-chemical and aqueous properties of the rocks, the rate of water exchange, the vulnerability of the groundwater to hydrochemical effects, the possible impact of human activity and socio-economic aspects shall be taken into account.
(3) The list of bodies of groundwater shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) The list of bodies of groundwater established on the basis of subsection 3 of this section shall be updated where necessary every six years.
§ 64. Assessment of the status of groundwater
The status of groundwater is assessed on the basis of the status of bodies of groundwater.
§ 65. Status of a body of groundwater
(1) The status of a body of groundwater shall be determined on the basis of the chemical status or quantitative status of the body of groundwater, whichever is worse.
(2) The chemical status of a body of groundwater characterises changes in the chemical composition of groundwater caused by human activity.
(3) The quantitative status of a body of groundwater characterises the extent to which a body of groundwater is affected by water abstraction.
(4) In determining the status of a body of groundwater, the impact of human activity and the hydrogeological conditions of the body of groundwater, including the protection of the aquifer and the natural chemical composition of the groundwater, and the status of aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems dependent on groundwater shall be taken into account.
§ 66. Determination of the status class of a body of groundwater
(1) The chemical status of a body of groundwater is characterised by two status classes:
1) good;
2) poor.
(2) The chemical status class of a body of groundwater is good if the pollutant content of the water in the body of groundwater does not exceed the threshold value, the groundwater quality standards or other quality indicators used to determine the chemical status of groundwater.
(3) The quantitative status of a body of groundwater is characterised by two status classes:
1) good;
2) poor.
(4) The quantitative status class of a body of groundwater is good if the conditions for the indicators of the quantitative status of groundwater are met.
(5) The status class of a body of groundwater is good if both the chemical and quantitative status classes of the body of groundwater are good. In other cases, the status class of the body of groundwater is poor.
(6) The values of the quality indicators used for determining the chemical status of groundwater corresponding to the status classes of bodies of groundwater, the conditions for the indicators used for determining the quantitative status, and the procedure for determining the status classes shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(7) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the determination of the status classes of bodies of groundwater.
(8) Notwithstanding the exceeding of the threshold value of the pollutant content of groundwater or the groundwater quality standard in one or more points, the chemical status of an at-risk body of groundwater shall nevertheless be considered good if:
1) the pollutant content of the body of groundwater does not impede the maintenance or achievement of good chemical status of the body of groundwater, is not accompanied by an environmental hazard and does not significantly impair the use of groundwater for human activities;
2) the values of other quality indicators used for determining the chemical status of the body of groundwater correspond to the standards of good chemical status;
3) in the case of a body of groundwater used or intended to be used for the abstraction of drinking water, it is ensured that the chemical status of the groundwater does not deteriorate by reducing the extent of water treatment operations necessary for the production of drinking water from groundwater;
4) a change in the direction of groundwater flow does not cause the intrusion of saline or other water into the aquifer.
(9) In the application of subsection 8 of this section, the results of the analysis of the characteristics of the river basin district and the pressure caused by human activity in accordance with § 44, including the overview of water abstraction and water discharge, shall be taken into account, as well as the geological and hydrogeological conditions of the body of groundwater, the impact of human activity on the chemical status of groundwater, the impact of surface water and other ecosystems associated with the body of groundwater on the body of groundwater, and groundwater monitoring data.
Page 15 / 72
Water Act
(10) In the application of subsection 8 of this section, a justification shall be provided in the river basin management plan as to why the chemical status of the at-risk body of groundwater is nevertheless considered good.
§ 67. Assessment of the status of an at-risk body of groundwater and a body of groundwater in poor status
(1) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise a more detailed description of each at-risk body of groundwater and a body of groundwater in poor status for the assessment of the threat or the causes of poor status, and the preparation of the programme of measures in accordance with § 46 of this Act for the achievement of the water protection objectives of the body of groundwater.
(2) A body of groundwater is at-risk if it is not likely to achieve good status due to human activity or if its status may deteriorate as a result of human activity.
(3) The more detailed description of an at-risk body of groundwater and a body of groundwater in poor status shall include detailed information on the following indicators:
1) the extent of the body of groundwater;
2) their background levels in the case of natural substances;
3) information on each exceedance of the threshold value of the pollutant content;
4) environmental objectives in the areas causing the threat to the body of groundwater;
5) the current or future use objectives and importance of the body of groundwater;
6) the geological and hydrogeological conditions of the body of groundwater;
7) the chemical composition of the groundwater;
8) the surface cover;
9) the average long-term annual recharge of the groundwater;
10) the impact of human activity and ecosystems on the status of the body of groundwater;
11) the interaction of the body of groundwater with aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and the body of groundwater, including the direction and volume of water exchange;
12) data from the river basin district's water monitoring programme.
(4) For each at-risk or poor status body of groundwater, the pollutants which are the cause of the threat or poor status or are indicator parameters shall be identified, and the threshold values for the content of these pollutants shall be determined.
§ 68. Protection of an aquifer
(1) The protection of an aquifer is the cover of the aquifer with a poorly water-conducting soil layer or an aquitard.
(2) In assessing the protection of an aquifer, the composition of the surface cover and all aquitards overlying the aquifer shall be taken into account.
(3) According to the natural protection of an aquifer, the territory of Estonia is divided into the following areas:
1) an area with unprotected groundwater is a karst area, an alvar and an area where the aquifer is overlain by a moraine layer up to 2 metres thick or a sand or gravel layer up to 20 metres thick;
2) an area with weakly protected groundwater is an area where the aquifer is overlain by a moraine layer 2–10 metres thick or a clay or sandy clay layer up to 2 metres thick or a sand or gravel layer 20–40 metres thick;
3) an area with moderately protected groundwater is an area where the aquifer is overlain by a moraine layer 10–20 metres thick or a clay or sandy clay layer 2–5 metres thick;
4) an area with relatively protected groundwater is an area where the aquifer is overlain by a moraine layer over 20 metres thick or a clay or sandy clay layer over 5 metres thick;
5) an area with protected groundwater is an area where the aquifer is covered by a regional aquitard.
§ 69. Data on bodies of groundwater and groundwater resources
(1) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the collection, storage and publication of the following information on bodies of groundwater:
1) delineated bodies of groundwater;
2) the results of water monitoring, water studies and hydrogeological surveys carried out on bodies of groundwater;
3) the status of bodies of groundwater and at-risk bodies of groundwater;
4) the pressure affecting the status of bodies of groundwater;
5) the measures implemented to improve the status of bodies of groundwater and their effectiveness;
6) the connection of bodies of groundwater to areas requiring protection;
7) other relevant data related to bodies of groundwater.
(2) The records of groundwater resources shall be kept in the relevant register on the quantity, level, characteristics, use and users of groundwater by boreholes, water intakes and groundwater deposits.
Division 6
Water Act
Page 16 / 72
Status of the Marine Area
§ 70. Marine area
(1) The marine area for the purposes of this Act comprises the internal sea, the territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone together, including the seabed and subsoil beneath them, to the extent established by the Maritime Boundaries Act and the international agreements of the Republic of Estonia.
(2) A marine region is a part of the marine area which differs from the rest of the marine area in terms of its biota, hydrological, marine and biogeographical characteristics and pollution load.
§ 71. Environmental status of the marine area and good environmental status of the marine area
(1) The environmental status of the marine area is the overall state of the environment of the marine area, the determination of which takes into account the structure, function and processes of the marine ecosystems belonging to that marine area together with natural geomorphological, geographical, biological, geological and climatic factors, as well as physical, acoustic and chemical conditions, including those arising from human activity in or outside the marine area.
(2) Good environmental status of the marine area is a status in which the marine area is maintained as ecologically diverse and dynamic, is clean, healthy and productive according to natural conditions, and is used sustainably, thereby ensuring the possible uses and activities of the marine area now and in the future, in particular when:
1) the structure, functions and processes of marine ecosystems and the associated geomorphological, geographical, geological and climatic factors enable these ecosystems to function fully and maintain their resilience to environmental changes caused by human activity, and the species and habitats of marine life are protected, the reduction of the diversity of biota caused by human activity is prevented and the functioning of biological components is in balance;
2) the hydromorphological, physical and chemical characteristics of marine ecosystems, including those caused by human activity in the region concerned, support these ecosystems in the manner described in clause 1 of this subsection, and the substances and energy, including noise, introduced or entering the marine environment as a result of human activity do not cause marine pollution or effects resulting from pollution.
(3) Marine pollution for the purposes of this Act is the direct or indirect introduction or entry into the air or the marine environment of substances, energy, radioactive radiation, electric and magnetic fields, noise, infrasound and ultrasound as a result of human activity in such a way that it has or may have a harmful effect, such as a threat to human health and property, damage to biota, maritime activities and the use of maritime services, the quality of marine ecosystems or the aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems directly dependent on them, including a reduction in the diversity of biota, a reduction in benefits and a deterioration in the quality of water, as a result of which the legitimate sustainable use of the marine environment is disturbed.
§ 72. Marine strategy
(1) For the protection of the marine area and the achievement and maintenance of good environmental status, a marine strategy shall be prepared for the entire Estonian marine area, which consists of the following parts:
1) assessment of the marine area;
2) definition of good environmental status of the marine area;
3) environmental targets for the marine area and their associated indicators;
4) monitoring programme for the marine area;
5) programme of measures for the marine area.
(2) In the preparation of the marine strategy, relevant existing national, European Union and international assessments, environmental targets, monitoring programmes and programmes of measures and transboundary environmental impacts and specificities shall be taken into account, and cooperation shall be carried out with other Member States of the European Union to ensure the coherence and comparability of the parts of the marine strategy.
(3) The provisions of the open procedure of the Administrative Procedure Act shall apply to the preparation, amendment and repeal of the marine strategy.
(4) The parts of the marine strategy shall be updated every six years from their establishment or updating.
(5) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the preparation and updating of the marine strategy.
(6) The content and preparation requirements of the marine strategy shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(7) The assessment of the marine area, the definition of good environmental status of the marine area and the environmental targets for its achievement and their associated indicators shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(8) The monitoring programme for the continuous assessment of the environmental status of the marine area shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
Water Act
Page 17 / 72
(9) The programme of measures for the marine area prepared for the achievement or maintenance of good environmental status shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 73. Application of derogations for the achievement of environmental targets
(1) Failure to fully achieve good environmental status of the marine area or environmental targets with the planned measures is permitted if the reason for this is:
1) an activity or inactivity for which liability for the achievement or maintenance of good environmental status of the marine area or for the achievement of environmental targets cannot be applied in the territory of Estonia or in the marine area under the jurisdiction of Estonia;
2) a natural cause;
3) force majeure;
4) a change or modification of the physical characteristics of the marine area resulting from an activity of public interest which outweighs the negative impact on the environment, including any transboundary impact.
(2) Failure to achieve good environmental status of the marine area or its environmental targets by the deadline is permitted if it is caused by natural conditions due to which it is not possible to achieve good environmental status of the marine area by the deadline.
(3) The application of the derogation provided for in clause 4 of subsection 1 of this section is permitted only if it is ensured that the change or modification of the physical characteristics of the marine area does not endanger or permanently preclude the achievement of good environmental status in the marine area, in the relevant marine region or in the marine area of another Member State of the European Union.
(4) In the case of the derogations referred to in subsections 1 and 2, interim measures shall be provided for to contribute to the achievement of good environmental status of the marine area and, in the case of the reasons referred to in clauses 2–4 of subsection 1, to prevent further deterioration of the status of the marine area and to mitigate the harmful impact. Such measures must contribute as much as possible to the achievement of good environmental status of the marine area.
(5) The derogations for the achievement of good environmental status of the marine area or its environmental targets provided for in this section may, where necessary, be specified in the programme of measures established on the basis of § 72(9) of this Act.
(6) The taking of interim measures is not required if there is no significant disturbance of the marine environment or if the costs associated with the measures are disproportionate to the threat to the marine environment, provided that the situation does not deteriorate further and the achievement of good environmental status does not become permanently impossible. Such a decision must be justified by evidence.
§ 74. Obligation to report activities threatening the environmental status of the marine area
A person who suspects that an activity or inactivity is threatening the environmental status of the marine area or has consequences resulting from it is obliged to notify the Environmental Inspectorate, the Police and Border Guard Board or an Estonian port thereof, if this can be reasonably expected from that person, taking into account their special role or knowledge.
Division 7
Hazardous Substances, Pollutants Threatening Groundwater, and Quality Standards for Water and Soil
§ 75. Hazardous substances
(1) A hazardous substance for the purposes of this Act is an element or compound which, due to its toxicity, persistence or bioaccumulation, causes or may cause a threat to human health and which damages or may damage other living organisms or ecosystems.
(2) The subcategories of hazardous substances are:
1) priority substances and certain other pollutants;
2) river basin specific pollutants;
3) priority hazardous substances.
(3) A priority substance and a certain other pollutant is a hazardous substance which poses a significant threat to the water environment or to human health through the water environment and which damages or may damage other living organisms or ecosystems and whose discharge into the water environment is limited in accordance with this Act for the purpose of reducing the discharge of these substances into the water environment.
(4) A river basin specific pollutant is a hazardous substance which is used in the river basin district, whose presence in surface water or in the bottom sediments of a water body is likely to be hazardous to aquatic life and which is therefore taken into account in assessing the ecological status of a body of surface water and whose discharge into the water environment is limited in accordance with this Act for the purpose of reducing the discharge of these substances into the water environment.
Page 18 / 72
(5) A priority hazardous substance is a hazardous substance which poses a significant threat to the water environment or to human health through the water environment and which damages or may damage other living organisms or ecosystems and whose discharge into the water environment is prohibited or limited in accordance with this Act for the purpose of ceasing or phasing out the discharge of these substances into the water environment.
§ 76. List of hazardous substances and quality standards for hazardous substances
(1) The list of priority substances and priority hazardous substances, the quality standards for priority substances, priority hazardous substances and certain other pollutants and the methods for their application, the quality standards for river basin specific pollutants and the activities related to the substance watchlist shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(2) The watchlist is a list of substances for which monitoring data are collected throughout the European Union to support their future identification as priority substances, in order to supplement the existing data on them from other sources, including the analysis of the characteristics of the river basin district, the overview of the environmental impact of human activity and the economic analysis of water use, and the water monitoring programme.
(3) In establishing the quality standards for river basin specific pollutants mentioned in subsection 1 of this section, the principles set out in point 1.2.6 of Annex V to Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council must be followed.
§ 77. Pollutants threatening groundwater and their threshold values
(1) The threshold value for the pollutant content of groundwater indicates a concentration of a pollutant in a body of groundwater above which there is a risk that the groundwater will not meet the standards for good chemical status.
(2) The threshold value for the pollutant content of groundwater and the pollutants threatening groundwater shall be determined for each body of groundwater, taking into account:
1) the background level of natural substances or ions or physical-chemical indicators of water in groundwater;
2) the hydrogeological conditions of the body of groundwater;
3) the status of water bodies, terrestrial ecosystems and wetlands dependent on the body of groundwater and their interrelationship and mutual impact;
4) the possible impact of current or future legitimate intervention in the use or functions of groundwater;
5) pollutants from human activities, including diffuse sources of pollution;
6) the origin of pollutants, their possible occurrence in nature, toxicity, tendency to spread, persistence and potential for bioaccumulation.
(3) A background level for the purposes of this Act is a pollutant content or indicator value in a body of groundwater in which there are no or very few man-made changes affecting the chemical composition of that body.
(4) The list of pollutants threatening groundwater, the threshold values for the content of these pollutants by body of groundwater and the principles for determining the background level shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(5) The threshold values for the pollutant content of groundwater of a body of groundwater crossing a state border shall be coordinated with the competent authority of the foreign state in accordance with § 30(4) of this Act before their establishment.
§ 78. Amendment of the list of pollutants threatening groundwater and the threshold values of pollutant content
(1) The list of pollutants threatening groundwater and the threshold values of pollutant content shall be amended and supplemented on the basis of new information obtained on substances in the interests of protecting human health and the environment.
(2) A pollutant may be removed from the list of pollutants threatening groundwater if that pollutant no longer threatens the good chemical status of the body of groundwater.
(3) An overview of the amendments to the list of pollutants threatening groundwater and the threshold values of pollutant content shall be provided in the river basin management plan.
§ 79. Groundwater quality standards
(1) The groundwater quality standard indicates the concentration of a pollutant in groundwater which must not be exceeded in the interests of protecting human health and the environment.
(2) If the implementation of the groundwater quality standards does not ensure the achievement of the water protection objectives of a surface water body dependent on a body of groundwater or causes a significant deterioration in the ecological or chemical status of the surface water body or damage to a terrestrial ecosystem dependent on the body of groundwater, stricter threshold values than the groundwater quality standards must be established.
Water Act
Page 19 / 72
(3) The groundwater quality standards for hazardous substances and the pollutants threatening groundwater to be taken into account in determining the chemical status of a body of groundwater, including the quality standards for the content of nitrates and the active substances of pesticides, shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) In the case provided for in subsection 2 of this section, stricter threshold values than the groundwater quality standards shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 80. Significant and sustained upward trend of pollutant content in groundwater
(1) A significant or sustained upward trend of pollutant content in groundwater indicates a statistically and environmentally significant increase in pollutant content in an at-risk body of groundwater.
(2) A significant upward trend of pollutant content in groundwater is an increase in the annual average pollutant content in an at-risk body of groundwater over 20 per cent of the baseline level over two consecutive years.
(3) A sustained upward trend of pollutant content in groundwater is an increase in the annual average pollutant content in an at-risk body of groundwater compared to the baseline level over six consecutive years.
(4) The baseline level is the average pollutant content of the water of the body of groundwater measured during groundwater monitoring in the years 2007–2009.
(5) In the event of an upward trend of pollutant content as mentioned in subsections 2 and 3, a threshold for reducing the pollutant content of groundwater must be established, the upward trend of pollutant content must be stopped or the pollutant content must be reduced.
§ 81. Assessment of a significant and sustained upward trend of pollutant content in groundwater
(1) A significant upward trend of pollutant content over two consecutive years and a sustained upward trend over six consecutive years shall be identified in an at-risk body of groundwater and a body of groundwater in poor status, and these data shall be published in the river basin management plan.
(2) If the maintenance of good chemical status or the achievement of good chemical status in a body of groundwater is impeded due to a point or diffuse source of emission or contaminated soil, the trend of a significant and sustained upward trend of pollutant content must be further assessed.
(3) In the course of the additional assessment mentioned in subsection 2, the causes of the significant and sustained upward trend of pollutant content shall be identified, the extent of the environmental nuisance affecting the groundwater from the emission source or contaminated soil shall be determined, and the environmental risk and environmental hazard arising therefrom shall be identified in order to implement measures to prevent the spread of pollution to a larger area, to avoid a threat to human health and the environment, significant negative changes in the chemical status of groundwater and delays in achieving water protection objectives.
(4) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the assessment and additional assessment of the significant and sustained upward trend of pollutant content in groundwater provided for in this section.
(5) An overview of the results of the additional assessment of the significant and sustained upward trend of pollutant content shall be published in the river basin management plan.
§ 82. Threshold for reducing the pollutant content of groundwater
(1) The threshold for reducing the pollutant content of groundwater (hereinafter also *reduction threshold*) indicates that the pollutant content in an at-risk body of groundwater has increased to 75 per cent of the threshold value of the pollutant content of groundwater or the quality standard.
(2) If the pollutant content of a body of groundwater reaches the reduction threshold, the competent administrative body is obliged to implement appropriate measures to stop the significant or sustained upward trend of the pollutant content or to reduce the pollutant content.
(3) The reduction threshold may be lower or higher than 75 per cent of the threshold value of the pollutant content of groundwater or the quality standard if:
1) at such a threshold it is possible to avoid or most effectively reduce the changes causing the deterioration of the chemical status of groundwater with the lowest costs;
2) the detection threshold for pollutant content does not allow for the implementation of a reduction threshold of 75 per cent of the threshold value of the pollutant content of groundwater or the quality standard.
(4) In the case provided for in clause 1 of subsection 3, the reduction threshold may be higher than 75 per cent of the groundwater quality standard if this does not cause a delay in achieving the water protection objectives.
(5) The reduction threshold for nitrate content in the groundwater of a nitrate vulnerable zone is 40 milligrams per litre.
(6) The reduction thresholds mentioned in subsections 1 and 3–5 shall not be changed during the six-year period of the river basin management plan.
Page 20 / 72
Water Act
(7) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the determination of the thresholds mentioned in subsections 1, 3 and 4 of this section and in § 80(5) for at-risk bodies of groundwater or bodies of groundwater in poor status.
(8) Information on the thresholds for reducing the pollutant content of groundwater shall be published every six years in the river basin management plan.
§ 83. Soil quality standards
The quality standards for hazardous substances contained in soil shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 84. Transboundary pollution
(1) Transboundary pollution for the purposes of this Chapter is pollution caused by an emission source located outside the territory of the Republic of Estonia.
(2) In the event of transboundary pollution, the competent authority of the foreign state shall be notified thereof without delay in accordance with the procedure provided for in § 30(4) of this Act, and the implementation of effective measures shall be planned to reduce or eliminate the impact of the pollution in order to ensure compliance with the quality standards in the part of the transboundary river basin district located in Estonia.
(3) If, despite the implementation of the measures mentioned in subsection 2 of this section, the quality standards are exceeded, the derogations provided for in §§ 39–42 of this Act shall apply to the relevant bodies of water of the transboundary river basin district.
(4) An overview of the measures implemented in the event of transboundary pollution shall be provided in the river basin management plan.
Chapter 3
Requirements for Drinking Water, Natural Mineral Water and Bathing Beaches
§ 85. Drinking water quality requirements
(1) Drinking water must comply with the quality requirements established on the basis of subsection 2 of this section, and the quality of drinking water must be controlled in accordance with the requirements established on the basis of the said subsection and analysed by the methods established on the basis of the same subsection.
(2) The quality and control requirements and analysis methods for drinking water shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 86. Requirements for the selection of the location of a drinking water intake
(1) In selecting the location of a drinking water intake, the possibility of forming a sanitary protection zone, the data of the relevant register on the quality and quantity of surface water and groundwater and the established groundwater reserve, and, where necessary, the possibility of protecting the recharge area of the drinking water intake shall be taken into account.
(2) A drinking water intake may not be established for the abstraction of water from a water body or aquifer in which the original quality of the water does not allow for compliance with the drinking water quality requirements established on the basis of § 85(2) of this Act with reasonable costs.
(3) A drinking water intake may not be established in a place where it is not possible to form a proper sanitary protection zone for the protection of the drinking water intake.
(4) The minister responsible for the area shall, by a directive, approve the list of water bodies belonging to a drinking water intake by water intake.
§ 87. Obligations of a drinking water handler
(1) A drinking water handler is an undertaking whose activity is the production, collection, treatment, packaging or other operation of drinking water, as a result of which drinking water is made available to a consumer or another person who must use drinking water in their activity for a fee or free of charge. A person who abstracts water from an individual water abstraction point, who abstracts on average less than 10 cubic metres per day or for the consumption of less than 50 people, shall not be considered a drinking water handler, unless the supply of drinking water is part of an economic activity or a public law activity.
(2) A drinking water handler shall ensure the compliance of drinking water supplied through a distribution network with the requirements established on the basis of § 85(2) of this Act up to the point where the drinking water becomes available to another handler or a consumer, unless the drinking water handler and the owner of the immovable have agreed otherwise.
Water Act
Page 21 / 72
(3) A drinking water handler who supplies immovables with drinking water through a distribution network has fulfilled its obligation to ensure the quality requirements of drinking water if it proves that the non-compliance of the drinking water with the quality requirements is caused by the water system of the immovable.
(4) The drinking water handler shall:
1) prepare a drinking water control plan and coordinate it with the Health Board;
2) submit to the Health Board the data on the implementation of the drinking water control plan and, at the request of a supervisory official, copies of test reports or an extract from the database of survey data in writing or digitally once a quarter;
3) carry out additional surveys at the request of a supervisory official in the event of contamination or suspicion of contamination of drinking water;
4) investigate the causes of non-compliance with the drinking water quality requirements, implement the necessary measures to eliminate the deficiencies, and notify the consumers and the structural unit of the Health Board of the location of the business of the deficiencies without delay;
5) submit to consumers and supervisory officials information on the compliance of the handled drinking water in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Public Information Act;
6) notify the Health Board of any contamination of drinking water or interruption of water supply lasting more than 24 hours;
7) organise microbiological, chemical and indicator parameter surveys in an accredited laboratory.
(5) The drinking water control plan mentioned in clause 1 of subsection 4 of this section shall be updated at least every five years and coordinated with the Health Board.
(6) The drinking water handler shall carry out the operations provided for in subsection 4 at its own expense.
§ 88. Right of a local government unit to restrict the use of water used for the production of drinking water for purposes other than domestic needs
If there is not enough drinking water to satisfy the need for drinking and food preparation, a local government unit has the right to restrict the use of water used for the production of drinking water for other purposes until the water reserve has been restored to the necessary level.
§ 89. Natural mineral water
Natural mineral water (hereinafter also *mineral water*) is water for drinking which is microbiologically beneficial to health, which originates from an aquifer and flows out of a spring protected from contamination, from which water is abstracted through one or more natural or artificially modified water intakes.
§ 90. Duties of a person marketing mineral water and spring water and using a spring
(1) A public law and private law legal person and a natural person who is a producer of natural mineral water or spring water within the meaning of the Product Conformity Act, as well as a distributor of natural mineral water or spring water, including an importer, is responsible for placing natural mineral water or spring water on the market and for its conformity.
(2) The producer of natural mineral water referred to in subsection 1 of this section:
1) may put a mineral water spring into use and bottle water only after it has been established on the basis of surveys by competent authorities that the water complies with the requirements established for mineral water on the basis of subsection 6 of this section and a water permit has been granted for the commissioning of the spring in accordance with this Act or a permit from the competent authority of the country of origin has been granted for the mineral water of another country;
2) must bottle mineral water at the water abstraction point;
3) shall submit a written application to the Health Board for the recognition of mineral water extracted and produced in Estonia or originating from a country outside the European Economic Area (hereinafter *third country*) to be placed on the market in Estonia, survey data from competent authorities and detailed information in accordance with the requirements of this Act and the legal acts established on the basis thereof;
4) may place on the market in Estonia mineral water which has been recognised by the Health Board or the competent authority of another country and which has been entered in the list of mineral waters of the Official Journal of the European Union;
5) may place on the market in Estonia mineral water obtained from the subsoil of a third country only if the competent authority of the country of origin of the water has certified that it regularly checks the conformity of this water and that this water complies with the requirements established for mineral water in the European Union, and the conformity of the mineral water has been recognised by the Health Board;
6) may not add any substances to mineral water other than carbon dioxide;
7) may not market mineral water from one and the same spring under several sales names or name packaged drinking water, table water, spring water or other water as natural mineral water or mineral water.
(3) The producer of natural mineral water referred to in subsection 1 shall pay the accommodation and travel costs to the water abstraction point and back for two representatives of the Health Board who are involved in the assessment of the conformity of the natural mineral water abstraction point, spring, abstraction equipment and treatment. This obligation shall apply only if the Health Board has to incur expenses which are not covered by the state fee in the procedure for the recognition of mineral water from the subsoil of a third country.
(4) For the procedure for the recognition of natural mineral water, for the assessment of the conformity of water abstraction and treatment equipment, for the issue of a recognition decision and the extension of its validity, and for the notification of the European Commission and the Member States, a state fee shall be paid in the amount provided for in the State Fees Act.
Page 22 / 72
Water Act
(5) The decision on the recognition of mineral water obtained from the subsoil of a third country and imported into the European Economic Area is valid for five years. The recognition procedure need not be repeated if, before the expiry of five years, the competent authority of the country of origin has again certified the conformity of the mineral water.
(6) The requirements for natural mineral water and spring water shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 91. Duties of the owner and possessor of a bathing beach
(1) The owner or possessor of a bathing beach shall:
1) ensure safe conditions of use, the conformity of the water used and the control and surveys of the water in an accredited laboratory in accordance with the requirements established on the basis of this Act;
2) publish information on the quality indicators of bathing water in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Public Information Act in accordance with the requirements of the Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters.
(2) The requirements for bathing water and bathing beaches shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 92. Duties of the Health Board in the field of drinking water, bathing water and mineral water
(1) The Health Board is the competent authority in the field of drinking water and bathing water, which:
1) organises the monitoring of drinking water and bathing water;
2) participates in the development and implementation of monitoring and warning systems for responding to hazardous situations related to drinking water and bathing water;
3) collects and processes data on compliance with the quality requirements for drinking water and bathing water;
4) publishes information on the quality indicators of drinking water and bathing water;
5) advises consumers and handlers and gives recommendations for the elimination of health hazards;
6) decides on the use of drinking water and bathing water that does not comply with the quality requirements;
7) prepares an annual report on the compliance of bathing water with the quality requirements and a report every three years on the compliance of drinking water with the quality requirements;
8) submits the report mentioned in clause 7 of this subsection for coordination to the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Ministry of the Environment;
9) engages in international cooperation for the elimination of health hazards caused by drinking water and bathing water;
10) organises, in cooperation with experts, a health risk assessment and the development of a programme of measures if the limit values of substances and microorganisms in drinking water are exceeded;
11) carries out additional surveys to determine the substances and microorganisms contained in drinking water whose content is not regulated by legal acts, if there is reason to believe that the presence or excessive amount of these substances and microorganisms poses a potential threat to human health;
12) provides a reference service for drinking water surveys.
(2) The costs of the activities mentioned in clause 10 of subsection 1 of this section shall be borne by the drinking water handler if the deterioration of the quality of the drinking water is due to the activity of the drinking water handler.
(3) The Health Board is the competent authority in the field of natural mineral water, which:
1) recognises water extracted and produced in Estonia or originating from a third country to be placed on the market in Estonia as natural mineral water;
2) shall make a decision on the recognition or refusal to recognise natural mineral water no later than on the 180th day after the submission of all required data, and shall justify the recognition or refusal to recognise;
3) shall check the survey and analysis data submitted by the person placing it on the market and, where necessary, also the conformity of the water abstraction equipment and the treatment of natural mineral water with the established requirements;
4) shall declare a recognition decision invalid if the composition or other properties of the natural mineral water have changed due to permanent circumstances;
5) shall notify the European Commission of each recognition of natural mineral water and declaration of a recognition decision invalid, shall publish the recognition data and shall, at the request of the European Commission or a Member State, forward all relevant information on the recognition of the water and the results of regular control;
6) may temporarily suspend or restrict the marketing in the territory of Estonia of natural mineral water which does not comply with the established requirements or which poses a threat to human health, notifying the European Commission and the competent authorities of the Member States of its decision together with a justification without delay.
Chapter 4
Organisation of Sewage Collection and Treatment
Division 1
Water Act
Page 23 / 72
Terms
§ 93. Sewage collection area
A sewage collection area is an area where there are sufficient inhabitants or economic activity to collect sewage by means of sewerage and to direct the sewage to a sewage treatment plant or the wastewater to a receiving body.
§ 94. Load of a sewage collection area
The load of a sewage collection area is the largest amount of pollution caused by sewage in a sewage collection area, depending on the season, which is expressed in population equivalents and in the calculation of which the sewage of permanent residents, tourists and industry and other undertakings is taken into account, regardless of whether it is discharged into a public sewerage system or not. The load of a sewage collection area does not include industrial sewage which is treated in an industrial sewage treatment plant.
§ 95. Population equivalent
A population equivalent is a unit of the average daily conditional pollution load caused by one person. The value of a population equivalent expressed through biochemical oxygen demand (BOD7) is 60 grams of oxygen per day.
§ 96. On-site treatment plant
An on-site treatment plant is a sewage treatment plant with a design load of up to 50 population equivalents.
§ 97. Pre-treatment plant
A pre-treatment plant is a sludge, sand, grease or oil trap and their combination and other technological equipment for the partial treatment of sewage, after which the sewage is discharged into a public sewerage system or an industrial sewage treatment plant.
§ 98. Industrial sewage treatment plant
An industrial sewage treatment plant is a sewage treatment plant which treats sewage generated in industry or other production and from which the treated water is discharged into a receiving body.
Division 2
Formation of a Sewage Collection Area
§ 99. Formation and amendment of a sewage collection area
(1) For the formation or amendment of a sewage collection area, a local government unit must submit an application in free form to the Ministry of the Environment.
(2) On the basis of the criteria for the formation of a sewage collection area provided for in § 100 of this Act and after coordinating the formation and extent of the sewage collection area with the relevant local government unit, the minister responsible for the area shall establish the sewage collection areas by a directive.
(3) A local government unit shall enter the boundaries of the sewage collection area in the comprehensive plan together with the area to be covered by a public sewerage system in the future, which is not designated as or included in a sewage collection area.
(4) The minister responsible for the area shall amend the established sewage collection area on their own initiative or at the proposal of the relevant local government unit or at the proposal of the Environmental Board, which has been coordinated with the local government unit, on the basis of the criteria for the formation of a sewage collection area.
§ 100. Criteria for the formation of a sewage collection area
(1) The formation of a sewage collection area shall be based on the protection of the aquifer and the load of the sewage collection area, taking into account the socio-economic criterion, the status of surface water and the water protection objective.
(2) The size of a sewage collection area must be at least five hectares.
(3) In the formation of a sewage collection area, the ability of a household to pay for the public water supply and sewerage service must be taken into account. The expenses of one member of a household for the public water supply and sewerage service may not exceed four per cent of their average annual net income in the county of their place of residence according to the data of Statistics Estonia.
§ 101. Formation of a sewage collection area according to the protection of the aquifer and the load of the sewage collection area
(1) In an area with weakly protected or unprotected groundwater, a sewage collection area must be formed if the load per hectare is ten population equivalents or more.
Page 24 / 72
Water Act
(2) In an area with moderately protected groundwater, a sewage collection area must be formed if the load per hectare is 15 population equivalents or more.
(3) In an area with relatively protected or protected groundwater, a sewage collection area must be formed if the load per hectare is 20 population equivalents or more.
(4) At the proposal of the Environmental Board, a sewage collection area may be formed with loads smaller than those provided for in subsections 1–3 of this section if it is necessary for achieving water protection objectives and if it is socio-economically justified.
Division 3
Requirements for a Sewage Treatment Plant
§ 102. Selection of the location of a sewage treatment plant
(1) In selecting the location of a sewage treatment plant, environmental nuisances must be reduced as much as possible, including preferring areas:
1) where, in the event of an accident at the sewage treatment plant, the sewage does not endanger groundwater or surface water;
2) where the sewage treatment plant, except for closed systems, is located downwind from the settlement with respect to the prevailing winds;
3) which are not threatened by floods.
(2) In addition to that provided for in subsection 1 of this section, the selection of the location of a sewage treatment plant must take into account:
1) the existing sewerage and its condition;
2) the construction and hydrogeological conditions of the land area.
§ 103. Selection of a sewage treatment plant
In selecting a sewage treatment plant, the following must be taken into account:
1) the emission limit values for wastewater established on the basis of § 128(7) of this Act;
2) the physical and chemical properties of sewage;
3) the dynamics of the generation of sewage and the change in its properties over time;
4) the load of sewage discharged into the sewage treatment plant, including the change in the hydraulic load in the future;
5) the cost of the sewage treatment plant during its operation;
6) the economic viability of the construction and use of the sewage treatment plant;
7) in the case of discharge of wastewater into the soil, the protection of the aquifer;
8) the ecological indicators and the physical and chemical indicators of the water of the water body into which the wastewater is discharged.
Division 4
Collection, Treatment, On-site Treatment and Removal of Urban Sewage
§ 104. Obligation to organise the collection, treatment, on-site treatment and removal of urban sewage
(1) A local government unit is obliged to organise the collection and treatment of urban sewage before discharging it as wastewater into a receiving body up to the emission limit values for wastewater established on the basis of § 128(7) or the sewage treatment levels referred to in § 128(6) of this Act.
(2) The degree of sewage treatment is the rate of removal of pollutants in a sewage treatment plant, expressed as a percentage.
(3) Urban sewage does not include sewage from industry or other production which is treated in an industrial sewage treatment plant.
(4) In order to achieve compliance with the requirements for wastewater discharged into a receiving body, a local government unit is obliged to ensure the existence of a public sewerage system in a sewage collection area for the discharge of sewage into a sewage treatment plant, except in a sewage collection area with a load of less than 2000 population equivalents and in the case referred to in subsection 5 of this section.
(5) If the construction of a public sewerage system in a sewage collection area entails unjustifiably high costs, leak-proof collection tanks may be used for the collection of sewage in a sewage collection area with a load of 2000 population equivalents or more.
(6) In a sewage collection area with a load of less than 2000 population equivalents, the construction of a public sewerage system is not obligatory, but if a public sewerage system and a sewage treatment plant exist, they must be kept in good technical condition to ensure the proper collection and treatment of sewage.
(7) A local government unit shall establish rules for the on-site treatment and removal of sewage in its administrative region.
Water Act
Page 25 / 72
§ 105. Obligation to establish a septage receiving facility
(1) A local government unit is obliged to establish a septage receiving facility for the discharge of generated and collected sewage into a sewage treatment plant in a sewage collection area with a load of 1000 population equivalents or more.
(2) A local government unit is obliged to establish a septage receiving facility in a sewage collection area with a load of less than 1000 population equivalents if the nearest septage receiving facility is more than 30 kilometres away.
Chapter 5
Assessment and Management of Flood Risks
Division 1
General Provisions
§ 106. Flood risk
(1) Flood risk is the likelihood of a flood occurring, which may have an adverse effect on human health and property, the environment, cultural heritage and economic activity.
(2) A flood for the purposes of this Act is the temporary covering with water of land not normally covered by water, including a flood caused by a rise in the water level of a flowing water body or a rise in the sea level in a coastal area.
(3) A flood caused by a sewerage system is not considered a flood.
§ 107. Preparation of a flood risk management plan
(1) A plan for the management of flood risks is prepared for each river basin district or transboundary river basin district.
(2) The flood risk management plan (hereinafter also *management plan*) is prepared on the basis of the results of the risk assessment and the maps of flood hazard areas and flood risk areas.
Division 2
Flood Risk Assessment
§ 108. Bases for flood risk assessment
(1) For each river basin district or transboundary river basin district, a flood risk assessment report shall be prepared on the basis of available data, significant risk areas shall be determined, and maps of flood hazard areas and flood risk areas shall be prepared.
(2) In the risk assessment, the possible impact of climate change on the occurrence of floods and the data obtained from the exchange of information referred to in subsection 3 of this section shall be taken into account.
(3) In the risk assessment in a transboundary river basin district, information on common risks related to floods shall be exchanged with the competent authority of the foreign state in accordance with § 30(4) of this Act.
(4) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the flood risk assessment in cooperation with the Ministry of Rural Affairs, the Ministry of the Interior and other relevant ministries. The Ministry of the Environment shall involve local government units in the work.
§ 109. Flood risk assessment report
(1) The Ministry of the Environment shall prepare the flood risk assessment report.
(2) The flood risk assessment report shall be published on the website of the Ministry of the Environment and a summary of the report shall be included in the river basin management plan.
(3) The flood risk assessment report shall be reviewed and, where necessary, updated every six years from its preparation or updating.
(4) The requirements for the content of the flood risk assessment report shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Page 26 / 72
Water Act
§ 110. Determination of significant risk areas
(1) On the basis of the flood risk assessment report, the minister responsible for the area shall, by a directive, determine the significant risk areas.
(2) A significant risk area is an area where significant flood risks exist or may exist.
(3) Before determining common significant risk areas in a transboundary river basin district, information shall be exchanged with the competent authority of the foreign state in accordance with § 30(4) of this Act.
§ 111. Maps of flood hazard areas and flood risk areas
(1) For each significant risk area, a map of the flood hazard area and the flood risk area shall be prepared on a suitable scale from the point of view of flood risk management in the river basin district.
(2) The list of data to be marked on the map of the flood hazard area and the flood risk area shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(3) For the preparation of a map of a common flood hazard area and flood risk area belonging to a transboundary river basin district, information shall be exchanged with the competent authority of the foreign state in accordance with § 30(4) of this Act.
(4) The maps of the flood hazard area and the flood risk area shall be published in the river basin management plan and on the website of the Ministry of the Environment.
(5) The maps of the flood hazard area and the flood risk area shall be reviewed and, where necessary, updated every six years from their preparation or updating.
Division 3
Flood Risk Management
§ 112. Flood risk management plan
(1) The objective of preparing a management plan for significant risk areas determined in a river basin district is to reduce the possible adverse effect of a flood on human health and property, the environment, cultural heritage and economic activity and to reduce the likelihood of such a flood occurring.
(2) The management plan must address all aspects of risk management, including risk prevention, protection against floods and their possible consequences, preparedness for floods, flood forecasting and early warning systems.
(3) The requirements for the content of the management plan and the updated management plan shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) In the preparation of the management plan, the possible extent and course of floods, potentially flooded areas, the water protection objectives set out in this Act, the requirements for soil and water use and protection, plans, land use, nature conservation requirements and restrictions, navigation and port infrastructure, other infrastructure important for the functioning of the region, and the benefits and costs related to the plan shall be taken into account, among other things.
(5) The need to implement the relevant measures planned in the management plan shall be taken into account in the preparation of the river basin management plan, the land improvement maintenance plan, plans and flood risk analyses and plans.
(6) The Ministry of the Environment shall organise the preparation of the management plan in cooperation with the Ministry of Rural Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of the Interior and other relevant ministries. The Ministry of the Environment shall involve local government units in the work.
(7) The provisions on the river basin management plan in section 3 of division 3 of Chapter 2 of this Act shall apply to the preparation, updating and publication of the management plan, taking into account the exceptions provided for in this division.
(8) The management plan shall be prepared at the same time as the river basin management plan prepared in accordance with § 48 of this Act.
Water Act
Page 27 / 72
§ 113. Transboundary river basin district management plan
(1) The management plan for a transboundary river basin district shall be prepared for the part of the river basin district located in Estonia or for the entire transboundary river basin district. Where necessary, a more detailed management plan shall be prepared for a sub-basin of a transboundary river basin district.
(2) In the preparation of the management plan, the information established on the basis of § 112(3) and the information referred to in § 112(4) shall be exchanged with the competent authority of the foreign state in accordance with § 30(4) of this Act.
(3) In the preparation of a management plan covering the entire transboundary river basin district, cooperation shall be carried out with the competent authority of the foreign state in accordance with an international agreement and the data obtained during the exchange of information from the competent authority of the foreign state shall be taken into account.
(4) The measures planned in the management plan may not, due to their extent and impact, significantly increase the flood risk in the transboundary river basin district upstream or downstream in the territory of a foreign state, unless such measures have been coordinated with the competent authority of the state concerned in accordance with § 30(4) of this Act and an agreement has been reached on the application of appropriate measures.
§ 114. Implementation of the flood risk management plan
(1) The Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of the Interior shall organise the implementation of the management plan in cooperation with other ministries and local government units.
(2) Preparedness for floods shall be ensured in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Rescue Act and the Emergency Act in accordance with the emergency response plans and the management plan.
§ 115. Updating the flood risk management plan and the management plan for a transboundary river basin district
(1) The management plan and the management plan for a transboundary river basin district shall be reviewed and updated every six years from their preparation or updating.
(2) In updating the management plan and the management plan for a transboundary river basin district, the results of the updating of the flood risk assessment report, the maps of flood hazard areas and flood risk areas, and the possible impact of climate change on the occurrence of floods shall be taken into account.
Chapter 6
Water Use and Protection Requirements
Division 1
General Provisions
§ 116. Prevention of water pollution and over-abstraction
(1) Causing the pollution of a water body or groundwater, discharging wastewater onto frozen or snow-covered soil and polluting ice cover is prohibited.
(2) The discharge of pollutants into a receiving body is permitted only in the cases and under the conditions provided for in this Act, provided that this does not cause an environmental hazard.
(3) A local government unit shall organise the elimination of the consequences of the accidental spillage of a substance polluting water onto or into surface water or groundwater, soil or subsoil in its administrative region.
(4) The over-abstraction of water is prohibited.
(5) The over-abstraction of water is an activity as a result of which:
1) the flow, water level or volume of a water body permanently and significantly decreases;
2) the direction of groundwater flow changes, and as a result, the intrusion of saline or other water into an aquifer occurs or may occur, or the quality of groundwater deteriorates;
3) the groundwater level or pressure permanently drops or the flow of a spring decreases.
§ 117. Obligations to prevent the harmful effects of water
(1) A person may not, through their activity or inactivity, cause:
1) a flood;
2) the failure of a bank protection, dam, weir or other structure;
3) significant soil erosion or a landslide;
4) excess moisture preventing the intended use of the land.
Page 28 / 72
(2) A landowner, land possessor or water user must take measures to reduce or prevent the impact of their activity on a body of surface water, a body of groundwater or the property of a person.
(3) In order to prevent the damage associated with a flood and other harmful consequences, the unauthorised diversion and obstruction of floodwater is prohibited in a significant risk area.
(4) A local government unit shall organise the elimination of the consequences of a flood causing significant damage or the failure of a dam or other protective structure in its administrative territory.
§ 118. Water protection zone of the bank or shore of a water body
(1) To prevent the erosion of the bank or shore of a water body and diffuse pollution, there is a water protection zone on the bank or shore of a water body.
(2) The extent of the water protection zone from the baseline for calculating the water protection zone is:
1) on the Baltic Sea, Lake Peipsi, Lake Lämmijärv and Lake Pihkva, and Lake Võrtsjärv – 20 metres;
2) on other lakes, rivers, streams, springs, canals, main ditches and open main watercourses of land improvement systems – ten metres, except in the cases referred to in clause 3 of this subsection;
3) on main ditches and open main watercourses of land improvement systems with a catchment area of less than ten square kilometres – one metre.
(3) The baseline for calculating the extent of the water protection zone is the water boundary of the water body entered in the base map of the Estonian Topographic Database in accordance with the Spatial Data Act.
(4) If a main ditch, a canal or a ditch that is a main watercourse of a land improvement system is entered in the base map of the Estonian Topographic Database as a line object, the baseline for calculating the extent of the water protection zone is the edge of the depression.
(5) There is no water protection zone on the following bank or shore areas of a water body:
1) a port area, a bank or shore protection area established on a legal basis;
2) a bathing beach and a bathing place.
§ 119. Restriction of activities in the water protection zone
The following are prohibited in the water protection zone:
1) the extraction of a mineral resource and earth material and the carrying out of a geological survey preparing for the extraction of a mineral resource and earth material on the shore or bank of the water bodies listed in clauses 1 and 2 of § 118(2) of this Act, except in the cases provided for in § 120;
2) the felling of trees and shrubs on the shore or bank of the water bodies listed in clauses 1 and 2 of § 118(2) of this Act without the consent of the Environmental Board, except for the construction and maintenance of a land improvement system;
3) tillage, the use of fertiliser and sewage sludge, and the installation of a manure storage facility and clamp;
4) the use of a chemical plant protection product without registration referred to in § 196(1) of this Act;
5) construction, unless it is in accordance with the objective referred to in § 118(1) and the shore and bank protection objectives provided for in the Nature Conservation Act;
6) damage to the soil and other activity which causes the erosion of the shore or bank of the water body or diffuse pollution.
§ 120. Derogation for the extraction of a mineral resource and earth material and the carrying out of a geological survey in the water protection zone
(1) The restrictions provided for in clause 1 of § 119 of this Act do not extend to the bank of an artificial water body created as a result of the extraction of a mineral resource or earth material, which is located on a mineral deposit, a mining claim or its service area, until the obligation to restore the extracted land is deemed to be fulfilled in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Earth’s Crust Act.
(2) After the obligation to restore the extracted land is deemed to be fulfilled, the extraction of a mineral resource and earth material and the carrying out of a geological survey in the water protection zone of an artificial water body created as a result of the extraction of a mineral resource or earth material is permitted if consent for this has been obtained as part of the permit during the procedure for the mineral extraction permit or geological survey permit.
(3) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
§ 121. Derogation for the felling of trees and shrubs in the water protection zone
(1) In the water protection zone of the water bodies listed in clauses 1 and 2 of § 118(2) of this Act, trees and shrubs may be felled with the consent of the Environmental Board.
[RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
(2) If consent is applied for for the felling of trees and shrubs in the water protection zone of the water bodies listed in clauses 1 and 2 of § 118(2) and a forest notification is required for the felling in accordance with the Forest Act, consent for the felling is granted as part of the forest notification during the procedure of the forest notification in accordance with the Forest Act.
(3) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
Water Act
Page 29 / 72
§ 122. Restriction on the establishment of a burial site on the bank or shore of a water body
(1) It is prohibited to establish a burial site on the shore of the water bodies listed in clause 1 of § 118(2) of this Act closer than 200 metres from the baseline for calculating the water protection zone.
(2) It is prohibited to establish a burial site on the banks of the water bodies listed in clauses 2 and 3 of § 118(2) of this Act closer than 50 metres from the baseline for calculating the water protection zone.
§ 123. Application of the most stringent restriction
If two or more activity restrictions have been established for the protection of water, the most stringent of them shall be applied.
Division 2
Treatment of Sewage and Discharge of Wastewater
and Pollutants into a Receiving Body
§ 124. Conditions for sewage treatment
(1) Sewage must be treated on-site, discharged into a sewage treatment plant or collected in a collection tank and transported to a septage receiving facility, unless otherwise provided for in this division.
(2) In a sewage collection area and in such an area outside a sewage collection area where there is no public sewerage system, the generator of sewage must collect the sewage in a leak-proof collection tank and organise its transport to the septage receiving facility specified in the plan for the development of public water supply and sewerage of the local government.
(3) In a sewage collection area with a load of less than 2000 population equivalents, where there is no public sewerage system, in addition to that provided for in subsection 2 of this section, an on-site treatment plant may be established for the treatment of sewage and biologically or tertiary treated sewage may be discharged into a receiving body.
(4) The use of on-site treatment plants is prohibited in a sewage collection area with a load of 2000 population equivalents or more. This prohibition does not apply to pre-treatment plants or industrial sewage treatment plants.
(5) In a sewage collection area with a load of 2000 population equivalents or more, several sewage treatment plants may be established if the design pollution load of each sewage treatment plant to be established is at least 50 population equivalents.
(6) Outside a sewage collection area, where there is no public sewerage system, an on-site treatment plant may be established or leak-proof collection tanks may be used.
§ 125. Prohibition and restriction of the discharge of hazardous substances into a receiving body, groundwater, karst and a karst lake
(1) The direct discharge of hazardous substances into groundwater, karst and a karst lake is prohibited.
(2) The direct discharge of hazardous substances into groundwater for the purposes of this Act is the discharge of hazardous substances into groundwater in such a way that they do not leach through the soil or subsoil.
(3) The discharge of a priority hazardous substance into a receiving body is prohibited, except in exceptional cases on the basis of a water permit or an integrated permit. The Environmental Board (hereinafter also *the permit issuer*) must indicate the priority hazardous substance in the water permit or integrated permit if the monitoring result indicates the presence of the priority hazardous substance in the wastewater.
(4) The Environmental Board may, in a water permit or an integrated permit, indicate a priority substance, a certain other pollutant and a river basin specific pollutant and set emission limit values for these substances, taking into account the hazardousness of the substance, the concentration in the wastewater, the status of the receiving body, the concentration of the substance in the groundwater, the area of activity of the undertaking and the impact of the activity on the receiving body. The Environmental Board must set the emission limit value for the said hazardous substance in the water permit or integrated permit if the monitoring result indicates an exceedance of the emission limit value of the hazardous substance.
§ 126. Prohibition and restriction of the direct discharge of wastewater and pollutants into groundwater, karst and a karst lake
(1) The direct discharge of wastewater and pollutants into groundwater, karst and a karst lake is prohibited.
(2) On the basis of the registration referred to in § 196(1) of this Act, groundwater that has passed through a heat exchanger in a ground-source heat pump system may be discharged directly into groundwater, karst or a karst lake if it is returned to the same aquifer outside the sanitary protection zone or maintenance area of such a groundwater intake that is used for the abstraction of drinking water.
(3) If it does not impede the achievement of the water protection objective for the body of groundwater, wastewater may be discharged directly into groundwater, karst or a karst lake under the conditions set out in a water permit or an integrated permit:
1) wastewater, if it is socio-economically justified;
2) wastewater which contains no other pollutants than those generated during the exploration and extraction of combustible mineral resources, into layers of geological sediments from which combustible mineral resources or other substances have been extracted, or into other layers of geological sediments which cannot be permanently used for other purposes for natural reasons;
Page 30 / 72
Water Act
3) water pumped out of mines and quarries or water pumped out in connection with construction and maintenance work, provided that the water is discharged into the same aquifer from which it was pumped out.
(4) If it does not impede the achievement of the water protection objective for the body of groundwater, substances may be discharged directly into groundwater, karst or a karst lake for scientific purposes for the description and protection of surface water and groundwater or for the improvement of the status of a body of groundwater in the amount which is essential for the said purpose, on the basis of and under the conditions set out in the registration referred to in § 196(1) of this Act.
(5) When setting the relevant conditions for the protection of groundwater, the permit issuer may, if it does not impede the achievement of the water protection objective for the body of groundwater, permit:
1) the injection of natural gas or liquefied gas for the purpose of its storage into layers of geological sediments which cannot be permanently used for other purposes for natural reasons;
2) the injection of natural gas or liquefied gas for the purpose of its storage into layers of geological sediments if it is essential for ensuring the supply of natural gas and if the deterioration of the status of the receiving groundwater or the threat thereof in the future is prevented during storage.
§ 127. Prevention of the discharge of wastewater and pollutants into the soil and a water body in the sanitary protection zone and maintenance area of a water intake
(1) The discharge of wastewater and pollutants into the soil is not permitted in the sanitary protection zone and maintenance area of a water intake and closer than 50 metres from the outer boundary of the sanitary protection zone or maintenance area and closer than 50 metres from a water intake which does not have a sanitary protection zone or maintenance area, or from a dug well used for drinking water.
(2) The discharge of wastewater into a water body is not permitted in the sanitary protection zone of a water intake and up to 50 metres outside the sanitary protection zone of a water intake.
(3) The discharge into the soil of wastewater and pollutants generated during the maintenance of the filters of a water intake facility is not permitted in the sanitary protection zone or maintenance area of a water intake.
§ 128. Requirements for the discharge of wastewater into a receiving body and emission limit values and sewage treatment levels
(1) Wastewater discharged into a receiving body must comply with the emission limit values for wastewater established on the basis of subsection 7 of this section or determined by a water permit and an integrated permit, and the emission loads of pollutants determined by a water permit or an integrated permit, unless the discharge of wastewater into a receiving body is prohibited in accordance with this division.
(2) If wastewater is discharged into a water body near which there is a bathing place or a bathing beach, the wastewater outlet must be at least 200 metres away from the bathing place or bathing beach.
(3) The emission limit values for wastewater and the sewage treatment levels depend on the type of sewage, the load of the sewage collection area and the environmental status.
(4) If there is no sewage collection area for the purposes of this Act, the determination of the emission limit values for wastewater and the sewage treatment levels shall be based on the load of the sewage treatment plant instead of the load of the sewage collection area and, in the absence of a sewage treatment plant, on the load of the pollution source.
(5) The load of a sewage treatment plant is the daily pollutant load calculated on the basis of the average weekly amount of pollutants entering the sewage treatment plant during a year, in population equivalents.
(6) A water permit or an integrated permit shall determine the sewage treatment levels only if the emission limit values for wastewater cannot be achieved by means of conventional biochemical treatment and the implementation of additional technologies would entail excessive costs.
(7) The requirements for the discharge of wastewater into a receiving body and for monitoring, the emission limit values for wastewater and the methods for assessing compliance with the requirements for wastewater shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(8) The discharge of wastewater into the soil is prohibited in a sewage collection area with a load of 2000 population equivalents or more.
§ 129. Requirements for the discharge of storm water into a receiving body
(1) In the management of storm water, solutions which allow for the disposal of storm water at its source, avoiding the pollution of storm water, shall be preferred.
(2) Storm water for the purposes of this Act is water that has fallen as precipitation and is collected and drained through structures, including ditches.
Page 31 / 72
(3) Nature-based solutions used for the disposal of storm water, such as green areas, retention ponds, rain gardens, infiltration trenches and other solutions which allow for the disposal of storm water mainly through landscaping, avoiding the pollution of storm water, are not considered to be the discharge of storm water into a receiving body for the purposes of this Act.
(4) Storm water discharged into a receiving body must comply with the emission limit values for storm water established on the basis of subsection 5 of this section and the emission loads determined by a water permit or an integrated permit.
(5) The emission limit values for storm water and the requirements for discharge into a receiving body and for monitoring shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(6) A storm water outlet may not cause non-compliance with the quality requirements of bathing water.
(7) The discharge of storm water into the soil in the sanitary protection zone and maintenance area of a water intake is prohibited.
§ 130. Requirements for the discharge of mine and quarry water and cooling water into a receiving body
(1) Mine and quarry water discharged into a receiving body must comply with the emission limit values for mine and quarry water established on the basis of subsection 2 of this section and the emission loads determined by a water permit.
(2) The emission limit values for mine and quarry water and the requirements for discharge into a receiving body and for monitoring shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(3) Cooling water discharged into a receiving body must comply with the emission limit values for cooling water established on the basis of subsection 4 of this section and the emission loads determined by a water permit.
(4) The emission limit values for cooling water and the requirements for the discharge of cooling water into a receiving body and for monitoring shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 131. Requirements for the discharge of water from aquaculture into a receiving body
(1) Water from aquaculture discharged into a receiving body must comply with the emission limit values established on the basis of subsection 2 of this section and the emission loads determined by a water permit.
(2) The water protection requirements for aquaculture, including the emission limit values for water from aquaculture and the requirements for discharge into a receiving body and for monitoring, shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 132. Restriction of the discharge of wastewater and pollutants into a water body on the basis of a water permit and an integrated permit
(1) In the case of discharging wastewater and pollutants into a water body whose surface water body status class is moderate, poor or very poor, or if there is a risk of deterioration of the status class of the surface water body, the permit issuer may reduce the permitted emission loads of wastewater and pollutants in a water permit or an integrated permit or establish stricter emission limit values than the limit values established on the basis of § 128(7) of this Act.
(2) If the emission load of wastewater and pollutants determined or planned by a water permit or an integrated permit exceeds the total permitted emission load of pollutants for the water body or a water body established by the programme of measures of the river basin management plan for a year, the permit issuer may reduce the emission loads of wastewater and pollutants in all water permits or integrated permits granted for the discharge of wastewater or pollutants into that water body proportionally by the amount exceeding that emission load.
Division 3
Water Protection Requirements for a Sewerage Structure
§ 133. Sewerage structure
(1) A sewerage structure is a sewer pipe, a sewage treatment plant, a pumping station or other building or facility related to the collection and treatment of sewage and the discharge of wastewater into a receiving body, established for the collection, treatment of sewage or the discharge of wastewater into a receiving body.
(2) The requirements of this division do not apply to a storm water sewerage structure or a pre-treatment plant for sewage discharged into a public sewerage system, except for a septage receiving facility.
§ 134. Buffer zone of a sewerage structure
(1) The buffer zone of a sewerage structure is the smallest permitted distance of a sewerage structure, except for a pipeline, from a residential building and a building for accommodation, treatment, sports, education, trade and services, as well as a transport building which serves people on a regular basis, and from a dug and a bored well.
Page 32 / 72
(2) The buffer zone of a sewerage structure must, depending on the design load of the sewage treatment plant, the method of sewage treatment and sewage sludge treatment, and the flow of sewage discharged into a sewage pumping station, be at least five metres, but not more than 500 metres.
(3) The distance between an infiltration system that is an on-site treatment plant and a drinking water dug well depends, in addition to that provided for in subsection 2 of this section, on the soil and its properties and the slope of the ground.
(4) The extent of the buffer zone of a sewerage structure is calculated from the outer wall of the building of the sewerage structure or from the outer boundary line of the facility or equipment. The pipeline of a sewerage structure is not taken into account in determining the extent of the buffer zone.
(5) The buffer zone of a sewerage structure is determined separately for each technological part of the sewage treatment and sewage sludge treatment process.
(6) If the buffer zone of a sewerage structure and the sanitary protection zone of a drinking water intake overlap, the most stringent requirement shall be followed.
(7) Within the buffer zone of a sewerage structure, there may be buildings necessary for servicing the sewerage structure, including industrial and warehouse buildings and transport buildings not mentioned in subsection 1 of this section.
§ 135. Reduction of the buffer zone of a sewerage structure located in the territory of a production or industrial undertaking
If a sewerage structure has been or is being established in the territory of a production or industrial undertaking for the purpose of treating the sewage of that undertaking, but due to the configuration or size of the territory it is not possible to ensure the minimum extent of the buffer zone provided for in § 134(2) of this Act, the Environmental Board may, by a decision, reduce the buffer zone on the condition that measures are implemented for ensuring human health safety, preventing environmental hazards and reducing environmental risks in the treatment of sewage.
§ 136. Prevention of environmental hazards and reduction of environmental risks arising from a sewerage structure
(1) An environmental hazard arising from a sewerage structure may not extend beyond the buffer zone.
(2) If an environmental hazard or environmental risk arising from a planned sewerage structure may extend beyond the buffer zone, the local government unit must, for the prevention of such a hazard or the reduction of the risk, implement the necessary measures in spatial planning, including:
1) increasing the extent of the buffer zone if this does not impose unreasonable restrictions on landowners in the use of land;
2) changing the location of the sewerage structure.
(3) If a significant environmental nuisance arising from a sewerage structure extends beyond the buffer zone, its owner or possessor must implement the necessary measures to prevent the environmental hazard and reduce the environmental risk, including changing the technological solution for sewage treatment or sewage sludge treatment.
§ 137. Requirements for the planning, construction and use of a sewerage structure and the specified extent of the buffer zone
The requirements for the planning, construction and use of a sewerage structure and the specified extent of the buffer zone of a sewerage structure shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Division 4
Water Protection Requirements for a Storage Facility for Petroleum Products, Shale Oil, its Products
or Biofuel
§ 138. Storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel
(1) A storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel for the purposes of this division is a tank for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel with a capacity of:
1) over three cubic metres;
2) over three cubic metres together with a pipeline and equipment;
3) over three cubic metres together with a pipeline and equipment and a loading or filling area.
(2) A storage facility must ensure the storage of petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel in a way that does not harm human health or property or the environment.
(3) Storage facilities and equipment must be leak-proof.
§ 139. Requirements for the selection of the location of a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel
(1) In selecting the location of a storage facility, an area which meets all the following requirements must be preferred:
Page 33 / 72
1) groundwater is moderately, relatively or protected from pollution;
2) the storage facility is located downstream of the groundwater flow of nearby groundwater intakes and as far away from them as possible;
3) the storage facility is located downwind from the settlement with respect to the prevailing winds;
4) the area is not threatened by floods;
5) the area is used as production land.
(2) If an area meeting the requirements mentioned in subsection 1 of this section cannot be found within the boundaries of a rural municipality or a city, the location of the storage facility shall be an area which meets as many of the requirements mentioned in subsection 1 as possible.
§ 140. Buffer zone of a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel
(1) The buffer zone of a storage facility is the smallest permitted distance of the outer surface of a tank for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel or its filling or emptying opening from an establishment with a major accident hazard, a residential building, a building for accommodation, treatment, sports, education, trade and services, as well as a transport building which serves people on a regular basis.
(2) The buffer zone of a storage facility must, depending on the capacity of the storage facility, be at least 25 metres, but not more than 150 metres.
(3) If a storage facility serves an establishment with a major accident hazard, the buildings of the establishment with a major accident hazard may be located within the buffer zone and the buffer zone may extend to the sanitary protection zone of a water intake.
§ 141. Restrictions regarding the buffer zone of a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel
(1) Any activity not related to the use of the storage facility is prohibited within the buffer zone of a storage facility.
(2) Within the buffer zone of a storage facility, there may be buildings necessary for servicing the storage facility, industrial, warehouse and agricultural buildings and transport buildings not mentioned in § 140(1) of this Act.
(3) A storage facility may be located in the territory of an establishment with a major accident hazard if the storage facility serves only that establishment.
§ 142. Requirements for the planning, construction and use of a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel and the specified extent of the buffer zone
The requirements for the planning, construction and use of a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel and the specified extent of the buffer zone shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Division 5
Prevention of the Discharge of Pollutants from a Vessel into the Sea
and Requirements for Ballast Water
§ 143. Discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea
(1) The discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea is the discharge into the sea from a vessel of hazardous and noxious substances for any reason, including the leakage and pumping out of such substances, as defined in Article 1(5) of the International Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea, 1996, and the discharges into the sea specified in Annexes IV, V and VI of the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto (hereinafter *MARPOL*).
(2) The discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea is prohibited.
(3) In the marine area, in straits used for international navigation and on the high seas, the discharge of pollutants from a vessel is not considered a violation of the prohibition referred to in subsection 2 of this section if:
1) the discharge of pollutants from a vessel is necessary for the safety of the vessel or for saving human life at sea;
2) pollutants are discharged from a vessel into the sea for the purpose of combating pollution in order to reduce the damage resulting from pollution and the use of these pollutants in the marine area is registered under § 196(1) of this Act for the activity under clause 1 of subsection 2 of the same section, and in other cases the competent authority of the state where the pollutants are discharged from the vessel into the sea has granted a permit or consent;
3) the discharge of pollutants from a vessel complies with Rule 15 or 34 of Annex I or Rule 13 of Annex II of MARPOL;
4) the discharge of pollutants from a vessel complies with Rules 3 and 9–11 of Annex IV, Rules 3–6 and 9 of Annex V, and Rules 3, 4 and 12–16 of Annex VI of MARPOL.
(4) The discharge of pollutants from a vessel is not considered to be an infringement committed by the shipowner, the master or the crew acting under the responsibility of the master if the discharge of pollutants in the marine area, in straits used for international navigation and on the high seas is caused by damage to the vessel or its equipment and if, after the damage has occurred or the discharge has been discovered, all reasonable precautions have been taken to prevent or reduce the discharge.
(5) The derogation provided for in subsection 4 of this section does not apply if the discharge of pollutants from a vessel was caused by an intentional or reckless act of the shipowner or the master.
Page 34 / 72
Water Act
(6) The prohibition provided for in subsection 2 of this section does not apply to warships, naval auxiliary vessels and other vessels owned or operated by a state and used for non-commercial purposes.
(7) The procedure for handling hazardous and noxious substances at sea, on the Narva River and on Lake Peipsi shall be established by a regulation of the Government of the Republic.
§ 144. Environmental damage caused by the discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea and other prohibited activity at sea
(1) Damage to water or individuals of an animal or plant species caused by the discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea or other prohibited activity at sea (hereinafter *environmental damage*) is a directly or indirectly measured adverse change in the quality of water or in the indicators characterising the communities of animal or plant species, including in the quality of the habitat of individuals or in the behaviour or condition of individuals.
(2) Damage to coastal water is considered to be such an adverse change in the quality of water which deteriorates the status of coastal water so that the status class of coastal water changes.
§ 145. Identification of environmental damage and the baseline condition
(1) In identifying the environmental damage caused by the discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea or other prohibited activity at sea, the baseline condition and the provisions of subsections 3 and 4 of this section shall be taken into account.
(2) The baseline condition is the condition of a natural resource and the benefits provided by it that would have existed if the damage had not been caused.
(3) In identifying environmental damage, the environmental hazard of the pollutant, the amount of pollutants discharged from the vessel into the sea and their content in the sea water, the size of the population and distribution area of the species, the quality of the habitat of the individuals of the species, the changes in migration and reproductive behaviour and physiological condition, the duration and geographical extent of the change caused by the discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea or other prohibited activity at sea, the number of communities and populations affected by the change, the irreversibility of the change, and the recovery capacity and recovery time of the elements of the affected ecosystem shall be taken into account.
(4) An adverse change which is smaller than a natural change that is considered normal for a particular habitat, species or protected area, which occurs for natural reasons or during normal management, or from which a habitat, species or protected area recovers within a short period of time and without intervention to either the baseline condition or a condition which allows for the achievement of a condition equivalent to or better than the baseline condition is not considered to be environmental damage.
(5) If the status class of coastal water has not been determined, the identification of damage to water shall be based on the provisions of subsection 3 of this section and, where necessary, on an expert opinion, taking into account the type-specific reference conditions of the relevant body of coastal water, the presence of pressure factors and their presumed impact, the overall impression of the body of coastal water and the general description of the ecological status.
(6) In determining the extent of damage, it shall be taken as a basis that:
1) the damage is significant if the changes are extensive and cover a large area or a large number of communities and populations, but the damaged environment recovers within one to five years or if an estimated 1000 tonnes or more of pollutants have been discharged from the vessel into the sea;
2) the damage is major if the changes are irreversible or the restoration of the pre-damage condition takes more than five years or if an estimated 2000 tonnes or more of pollutants have been discharged into the sea.
(7) The environmental damage caused by the discharge of pollutants from a vessel into the sea or other prohibited activity at sea is identified by the Environmental Inspectorate. The Environmental Inspectorate has the right to demand from the person who caused the damage data related to the environmental damage or the threat of damage and other data necessary for identifying the damage.
(8) The list of species and groups of species, the consequence of the adverse effect on which is considered to be damage to water, individuals of animal or plant species or parts thereof for the purposes of § 144(1) of this Act, shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 146. Involvement of an expert
(1) The Environmental Inspectorate may involve experts in the assessment of damage.
(2) An expert may be a natural person who has long-term experience in the study of a natural resource and the benefits it provides and who has given reliable assessments on the protection or sustainable use of the natural resource in question, or a legal person through such a natural person.
(3) If environmental damage may affect human health, the Environmental Inspectorate shall, in selecting an expert, be guided by the opinion of the Ministry of Social Affairs on the criteria which an expert must meet in such a case.
Water Act
Page 35 / 72
§ 147. Conditions for discharging ballast water into the environment
(1) Ballast water that is safe for human health and the environment may be discharged into the environment.
(2) This Act uses the term *ballast water* in the meaning of the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004.
(3) Ballast water is considered safe for human health if it complies with the requirements of Rule D-2(2) of the Annex to the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004.
(4) Ballast water is considered safe for the environment if it complies with the requirements of Rule D-2(1) of the Annex to the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments, 2004.
Division 6
Restriction of Activities in the Sanitary Protection Zone of a Water Intake,
the Recharge Area of a Drinking Water Intake and the Maintenance Area
§ 148. Sanitary protection zone of a water intake
(1) The sanitary protection zone of a water intake is the land or water area surrounding a water intake used for the abstraction of drinking water or the production of drinking water, where activities are restricted in accordance with § 151 of this Act in order to prevent the deterioration of water quality and to protect the structures of the water intake.
(2) A sanitary protection zone is not formed around a groundwater intake if water is abstracted for drinking water use or for the purpose of drinking water production in an amount of less than ten cubic metres per day or for production water. A maintenance area in accordance with § 154 of this Act is formed around such a groundwater intake.
§ 149. Extent of the sanitary protection zone of a groundwater intake
(1) If the design water abstraction of a groundwater intake is 10–500 cubic metres per day, the extent of the sanitary protection zone is:
1) 10 metres if the aquifer opened by the intake is protected;
2) 30 metres if the aquifer opened by the intake is moderately or relatively protected;
3) 50 metres if the aquifer opened by the intake is unprotected or weakly protected.
(2) If the design water abstraction of a groundwater intake is over 500 cubic metres per day, the extent of the sanitary protection zone is:
1) 30 metres if the aquifer opened by the intake is relatively protected or protected;
2) 50 metres if the aquifer opened by the intake is unprotected, weakly protected or moderately protected.
(3) If the actual water abstraction differs from the design water abstraction, the Environmental Board may determine the extent of the sanitary protection zone or change the sanitary protection zone to a maintenance area, based on the actual water abstraction.
(4) If the extent of the sanitary protection zone of a groundwater intake and the protection zone of a public water supply and sewerage system established on the basis of the Building Code overlap, the most stringent requirement shall be followed.
§ 150. Extent of the sanitary protection zone of a surface water intake
(1) The extent of the sanitary protection zone of a surface water intake is:
1) 200 metres upstream, 50 metres downstream and 50 metres on both sides perpendicular to the line drawn through the water abstraction point and across the water body, if water is abstracted from a flowing water body;
2) the water area of the water body together with a zone at least 90 metres wide from the baseline for calculating the water protection zone towards the land, if water is abstracted from an inland standing water body.
(2) The extent of the sanitary protection zone of a surface water intake may be less than 90 metres from the baseline for calculating the water protection zone if the historical sanitary protection zone has been located closer than 90 metres from the baseline for calculating the water protection zone.
(3) If the extent of the sanitary protection zone of a surface water intake and the protection zone of a public water supply and sewerage system established on the basis of the Building Code overlap, the most stringent requirement shall be followed.
(4) In the cases provided for in this section, the Environmental Board shall determine the precise boundaries of the sanitary protection zone of a water intake on the basis of the sanitary protection zone project.
§ 151. Restriction of activities in the sanitary protection zone of a water intake
(1) In the sanitary protection zone of a water intake, the deterioration of the quality of groundwater, a water body or part thereof to an extent which may lead to a significant increase in the costs of water treatment for the production of drinking water must be prevented.
(2) Economic activity is prohibited in the sanitary protection zone of a water intake, except for:
1) the construction, servicing and use of a water intake;
2) the maintenance of a sanitary protection zone;
Page 36 / 72
Water Act
3) forest maintenance;
4) mowing of herbaceous plants and the harvesting or removal of the mown material;
5) the use of a lawfully constructed building and other activity related to a building in the intended manner, if the building does not cause the deterioration of water quality;
6) carrying out research.
(3) The following are permitted in the sanitary protection zone of a water intake:
1) environmental monitoring;
2) environmental supervision;
3) state supervision of health protection.
(4) Only persons who perform the tasks related to the activities mentioned in subsections 2 and 3 of this section may be present in the sanitary protection zone of a surface water intake.
(5) The owner or possessor of a sanitary protection zone of a surface water intake may allow persons to be present in the sanitary protection zone of a water intake for recreational and environmental education purposes temporarily and to a limited extent, provided that the protection of the water intake and water is guaranteed. The said activity is not permitted without the consent of the water undertaking managing the surface water sanitary protection zone.
(6) The Environmental Board may, where necessary, require the owner or possessor of a water intake to mark the boundaries of the sanitary protection zone in nature or to enclose the sanitary protection zone with a fence. The relevant requirements shall be presented in the design conditions of the sanitary protection zone of the water intake.
§ 152. Extension of the extent of the sanitary protection zone of a water intake
(1) If the design water abstraction of a groundwater intake is over 500 cubic metres per day, the sanitary protection zone may extend up to 200 metres from the intake.
(2) If the design water abstraction of a surface water intake is over 500 cubic metres per day, the sanitary protection zone may cover the bank zone of the water body up to 1000 metres wide.
(3) In the cases provided for in subsections 1 and 2, the Environmental Board shall determine the precise boundaries of the sanitary protection zone of a water intake on the basis of the sanitary protection zone project.
(4) The requirements for the extension of the extent of the sanitary protection zone of a water intake mentioned in subsections 1 and 2 and the requirements for the sanitary protection zone project of a water intake shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 153. Recharge area of a drinking water intake and restriction of activities in a recharge area
(1) If the design water abstraction of a drinking water intake is greater than 500 cubic metres per day and the groundwater is weakly protected or unprotected and the sanitary protection zone does not ensure sufficient protection of the water of the aquifer opened by the drinking water intake in accordance with the groundwater quality standards and the threshold values of the pollutant content of groundwater, and also if it is likely that the good status of the body of groundwater will not be achieved, the Environmental Board may designate a recharge area for such a drinking water intake.
(2) A recharge area of a drinking water intake for the purposes of this Act is an area from which groundwater flows to a water intake and the extent of which is presented in the sanitary protection zone project of the water intake.
(3) On the basis of hydrogeological surveys, the Environmental Board may, where necessary, prohibit or restrict the following activities in the recharge area of a drinking water intake:
1) the construction of a building which poses an environmental hazard;
2) the use of fertiliser and plant protection products;
3) the discharge of hazardous substances into the soil and groundwater;
4) the use of sewage sludge and the placement of a manure clamp;
5) the extraction of a mineral resource;
6) the handling of waste;
7) the establishment of a cemetery.
(4) The procedure for determining the recharge area of a drinking water intake shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 154. Maintenance area and prohibition of activities in a maintenance area
(1) The following facilities have a maintenance area:
1) a bored well of an open-loop heating system;
2) a groundwater monitoring dug well, bored well and borehole belonging to the list of national environmental monitoring stations, which is used only for the purpose of groundwater monitoring;
3) a bored well through which less than ten cubic metres of water is abstracted per day;
4) a dug well.
Water Act
Page 37 / 72
(2) A maintenance area for the purposes of this Act is the land or water area surrounding a dug well, a bored well or a borehole, where activities are restricted in accordance with subsection 5 of this section in order to prevent the pollution of groundwater.
(3) The extent of the maintenance area is ten metres.
(4) The maintenance area of a groundwater monitoring dug well, bored well and borehole belonging to the list of national environmental monitoring stations is five metres if that dug well, bored well or borehole is used only for monitoring purposes.
(5) In a maintenance area, an activity which may endanger the quality of the water of the aquifer is prohibited, including:
1) the storage and use of fertiliser and plant protection products;
2) grazing;
3) the discharge of hazardous substances into the soil and groundwater;
4) the establishment of land improvement systems;
5) the construction of a building which poses an environmental hazard;
6) the use of sewage sludge, the spreading of manure and whey, and the placement of a manure clamp;
7) the establishment of a sewerage or sewage collection system and the discharge of wastewater or pollutants into the soil;
8) the establishment of a cemetery;
9) the handling of waste;
10) the extraction of a mineral resource.
Division 7
Environmental Requirements regarding Agricultural Activity
§ 155. Field book
(1) A person engaged in agriculture must keep a field book in which data on agricultural activity must be entered.
(2) Agricultural activity for the purposes of this Act is the cultivation and production of agricultural products, including harvesting, dairy farming, keeping and breeding of farm animals, and keeping land in good agricultural and environmental condition.
(3) The data entered in the field book shall be kept for ten years from the date of entering the data in the field book.
(4) Upon the transfer of an agricultural parcel or part thereof to a new possessor, the part of the field book containing data on the agricultural parcel or part thereof must be transferred to the new possessor, who shall continue to keep that part of the field book.
(5) The list of data to be entered in the field book and the procedure for keeping the field book shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 156. Good agricultural practice
(1) Good agricultural practice for the purposes of this Act are generally recognised production techniques and methods which correspond to the natural and climatic conditions of Estonia and take into account general environmental conditions, the observance of which allows for the reduction of the environmental risk to water caused by agricultural activity.
(2) The measures of good agricultural practice are provided for in clause 3 of § 119, in §§ 158–161, in subsections 1–7 of § 164, in subsection 1 of § 167 and in the legal act established on the basis of subsection 2, and in subsection 5 of § 168.
§ 157. Fertiliser
(1) A fertiliser for the purposes of this Act is a substance or preparation the purpose of which is to supply cultivated plants with nutrients. For the purposes of this Act, manure, liquid manure, silage effluent, compost and other organic substances of plant or animal origin used for fertilisation, which are introduced into the soil directly or processed, are also considered fertilisers.
(2) Manure for the purposes of this Act is animal excrement and a mixture of animal excrement and bedding, as well as processed manure.
(3) The type of manure is determined according to the percentage of dry matter contained in the manure:
1) liquid manure, which contains up to 7.9 per cent by mass of dry matter;
2) semi-liquid manure, which contains 8.0–19.9 per cent by mass of dry matter;
3) solid manure, which contains 20.0–24.9 per cent by mass of dry matter;
4) deep-litter manure, which contains at least 25.0 per cent by mass of dry matter.
§ 158. Requirements for the use and storage of fertiliser and the use of plant protection products
(1) The spreading of fertiliser from an aircraft is prohibited.
Page 38 / 72
Water Act
(2) The use of fertiliser and plant protection products and other activity that may deteriorate water quality is prohibited around springs and karst funnels within a radius of ten metres from the water boundary or the edge of the karst funnel.
(3) Mineral fertiliser may not be spread if the ground is frozen, covered with snow, periodically flooded or saturated with water.
(4) Nitrogen-containing mineral fertiliser may not be spread from 15 October to 20 March.
(5) The requirements for the use and storage of fertiliser for the protection of groundwater and surface water and for the prevention and limitation of pollution from agricultural sources and the methods for assessing compliance with these requirements shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 159. Requirements for the use of manure
(1) Liquid manure may not be spread from 1 November to 20 March and if the ground is frozen, covered with snow, periodically flooded or saturated with water.
(2) The Environmental Board may, based on weather conditions, prohibit the spreading of liquid manure from 15 October.
(3) Broadcast spreading of liquid manure is prohibited from 20 September to 20 March and if the ground is frozen, covered with snow, periodically flooded or saturated with water.
(4) Semi-liquid, solid and deep-litter manure and other organic fertiliser may not be spread from 1 December to 20 March and if the ground is frozen, covered with snow, periodically flooded or saturated with water.
(5) On a field without growing crops, manure must be incorporated into the soil as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after the spreading is completed.
[RT I, 22.02.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2021]
(6) Manure may be spread on arable land covered with growing crops from 1 November to 30 November if it is incorporated into the soil within 24 hours.
[RT I, 22.02.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2021]
(7) Arable land for the purposes of this Act is:
1) agricultural land;
2) horticultural land – a fruit and berry plantation, a nursery and a field covered with temporary greenhouses.
§ 160. Fertilisation on a sloped area
(1) If the ground slope is 5–10 per cent, the spreading of fertiliser on the surface is prohibited from 1 October to 20 March.
(2) The spreading of fertiliser is prohibited on arable land with a ground slope of over 10 per cent. By way of derogation, the spreading of fertiliser on a ground slope of over 10 per cent is permitted in the cases established on the basis of subsection 4 of this section.
(3) The determination of the ground slope shall be based primarily on the elevation data entered in the Estonian Topographic Database. If the data of the Estonian Topographic Database cannot be used for determining the ground slope, on-site measurement shall be used for determining the slope.
(4) The bases for determining the ground slope within an agricultural parcel and the derogations for fertilising an area with a slope shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 161. Limit values for nitrogen and phosphorus applied with fertiliser
(1) With manure, it is permitted to apply up to 170 kilograms of nitrogen per hectare of arable land per year, including nitrogen contained in the manure left on the land during grazing.
(2) Outside a nitrate vulnerable zone, on maize, grasses and grass-clover mixtures with up to 25 per cent of legumes, it is permitted to apply the amounts of nitrogen established on the basis of subsection 11 of this section with manure nitrogen. The manure must be spread before 15 August and in several applications. The derogation does not apply to peat soils.
(3) In the case referred to in subsection 2 of this section, an agricultural producer must keep a field-based record of the application of nitrogen and phosphorus to the soil and their removal from the soil.
[RT I, 22.02.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2021]
Water Act
Page 39 / 72
(4) The requirements and procedure for keeping records of the application of nitrogen and phosphorus to the soil and their removal from the soil shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(5) The use of fertiliser is prohibited on natural grassland, except for the nitrogen and phosphorus contained in the manure left on the land during grazing, the amount of which may not exceed the limit values for nitrogen and phosphorus provided for in subsections 1 and 8 of this section.
(6) Natural grassland for the purposes of this Act is grassland that has not been influenced by humans through fertilisation, tillage, sowing or other techniques. Natural grasslands include natural pastures and natural meadows, including dry meadows, wooded meadows, coastal meadows, alvar meadows, flood meadows, fen meadows and wooded pastures.
(7) With fertiliser, it is permitted to apply to agricultural crops an amount of nitrogen necessary for their growth per hectare of arable land per year, which is established on the basis of subsection 11 of this section.
(8) With manure, it is permitted to apply up to 25 kilograms of phosphorus per hectare of arable land per year, including phosphorus left on the land in animal excrement during grazing. The amount of phosphorus applied with manure to arable land may, where necessary, be increased or decreased, provided that the average amount of phosphorus applied over a rolling five-year period does not exceed 25 kilograms per hectare.
(9) Subsection 8 of this section does not apply if the demand for plant-available phosphorus in the soil is high or very high and, to prove this, a person engaged in agriculture has organised the taking and analysis of soil samples from every five hectares at least once in the last five years using an accredited laboratory analysis method.
(10) Phosphorus demand classes shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(11) The maximum amounts of nitrogen to be applied per hectare of arable land per year by agricultural crop, depending on the fertiliser demand necessary for the growth of the crop, shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(12) The calculated values of the nutrient content of different types of manure shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(13) The nutrient content of manure shall be determined on the basis of the values calculated on the basis of subsection 12 of this section or the results of a manure sample analysed using an accredited laboratory analysis method.
§ 162. Liquid manure spreading plan and fertilisation plan
(1) The spreading of liquid manure in an amount corresponding to 400 or more livestock units is permitted only on the basis of a liquid manure spreading plan approved by the Environmental Board.
(2) The list of data to be presented in the liquid manure spreading plan and the procedure for the submission and processing of the spreading plan shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(3) A person engaged in agriculture who uses 50 or more hectares of arable land and nitrogen-containing fertiliser must prepare a fertilisation plan each year before sowing or, in the case of a perennial crop, before the start of the growing season.
(4) The fertilisation plan may be kept in the field book. The data of the fertilisation plan shall be kept for ten years.
(5) The list of data to be presented in the fertilisation plan and the procedure for keeping the fertilisation plan shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 163. Restrictions on animal husbandry
(1) In animal husbandry, the size of the land used by an agricultural holding must allow for the spreading of the generated manure in accordance with the limit values for nitrogen and phosphorus applied with manure established in subsections 1 and 8 of § 161 of this Act.
(2) If the amount of manure generated in the holding exceeds the limit values for nitrogen and phosphorus applied with manure per hectare of arable land provided for in subsections 1 and 8 of § 161 of this Act, more animals may be kept if the excess manure is transferred on the basis of an agreement concluded with the recipient of the manure.
(3) If a third party's removal service is used for the removal of manure, the person ordering the service must keep the documents related to the provision of the service as an annex to the spreading or sales agreement.
§ 164. Manure storage requirements
(1) All livestock buildings where more than five livestock units are kept must have a manure storage facility or a manure and liquid manure storage facility, depending on the type of manure.
[RT I, 22.02.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2023]
Page 40 / 72
Water Act
(2) A manure storage facility or a manure and liquid manure storage facility must have the capacity to store the manure and liquid manure of the animals kept for at least eight months and, where necessary, depending on the technology used in the livestock building, also the sewage originating from there. In calculating the capacity of the manure storage facility, the amount of manure left on the pasture by the animals during the grazing period may be excluded.
(3) A livestock building where deep-litter technology is used and which has the capacity to store the amount of manure mentioned in subsection 2 of this section does not need to have a manure storage facility.
(4) If a livestock building with deep-litter technology does not have the capacity to store the amount of manure mentioned in subsection 2, there must be a storage facility with the capacity to store the excess amount.
(5) A manure storage facility, a manure and liquid manure storage facility and a livestock building must be leak-proof and their construction must ensure safety and the prevention of leaks during the operation of the storage facility, including during its filling and emptying.
(6) If five or fewer livestock units are kept in a livestock building and solid manure or deep-litter manure is generated there, the generated manure may be temporarily stored near the building on an area with a waterproof base and protected from rainwater before spreading or moving to a clamp.
[RT I, 22.02.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2023]
(7) If a livestock keeper directs the manure for storage or treatment to another person's storage facility or treatment site on the basis of an agreement, the livestock building must have a leak-proof storage facility with the capacity to store at least one month's amount of manure.
(8) The coefficients for converting farm animals into livestock units and the methodology for calculating the capacity of a manure storage facility shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 165. Storing manure in a clamp
(1) On arable land, it is permitted to store only solid and deep-litter manure in a clamp for up to two months before spreading, the amount of which does not exceed the amount used during one growing season.
(2) A manure clamp is a pile of manure stored on a field in accordance with the requirements established on the basis of § 158(5) of this Act.
(3) Deep-litter manure, the amount of which does not exceed the amount used during one growing season, may be stored in a clamp for up to eight months and the Environmental Board must be notified of the location of the clamp by submitting a notification through the information system at least 14 days before starting to clamp.
(4) The storage of solid and deep-litter manure in a clamp is prohibited from 1 November to 31 December.
(5) A manure clamp must be located on level ground, at least 50 metres from a water body, a well and a karst funnel. A manure clamp may not be established on a drainage pipe of a land improvement system, on unprotected groundwater, on excessively moist or flooded land.
(6) The data composition of the notification mentioned in subsection 3 of this section and the procedure for submitting the notification shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 166. Composting of manure
(1) Composting of manure for the purposes of this Act is the aerobic decomposition of manure, during which organic matter is decomposed by the action of micro- and macro-organisms. Composting of manure in a composting plant is not considered composting of manure for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Manure may be composted mainly in a manure storage facility or on arable land in a clamp. The amount of manure to be composted outside the manure storage facility of the undertaking is not included in the capacity of the manure storage facility.
(3) In a clamp, it is permitted to compost only deep-litter manure with a dry matter content of at least 25 per cent at the time of clamping. The dry matter content of the manure to be composted shall be determined at the expense of the producer from one sample of manure produced with uniform technology at least once every two years using an accredited laboratory analysis method.
(4) The Environmental Board must be notified of the establishment of a clamp for composting manure and its location by submitting a notification through the information system at least 14 days before starting to clamp.
(5) Composting in a clamp on a field is permitted in such a volume that the limit values of nutrients allowed to be spread on the same field, which are provided for in subsections 1 and 8 of § 161 of this Act, are not exceeded. The composted manure
Water Act
Page 41 / 72
must be no more than two metres high at the time of clamping and the shape of the clamp must prevent the accumulation of storm water on the clamp.
(6) The manure to be composted must be spread on the field from the clamp within 24 months of the start of clamping.
(7) After removing the compost from the clamp, the base of the clamp located on grassland must be revegetated by the beginning of the next growing season. A new clamp of manure to be composted may not be placed in the same location for five years after spreading.
(8) The data composition of the notification mentioned in subsection 4 of this section and the procedure for submitting the notification shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 167. Requirements for the storage and transport of fertiliser and silage
(1) In the transport and storage of fertiliser and silage, their entry into the environment must be prevented.
(2) The requirements for the transport and storage of fertiliser and silage shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 168. Restrictions on agricultural activity in a nitrate vulnerable zone
(1) In a nitrate vulnerable zone in an area with unprotected groundwater with a surface cover thickness of up to two metres and in a karst area, it is possible to restrict:
1) the application of nitrogen with mineral fertiliser to an annual average of 100 kilograms per hectare of arable land;
2) animal husbandry to 1.5 livestock units per hectare of agricultural land;
3) the use of sewage sludge.
(2) Agricultural land for the purposes of this Act is arable land and natural grassland.
(3) In a nitrate vulnerable zone, fertilisation, the use of plant protection products and the storage of manure in a clamp are prohibited around important springs and karst funnels up to 50 metres from the water boundary or the edge of the karst funnel.
(4) The extent of the restrictions provided for in subsections 1 and 3 shall be established by a regulation of the Government of the Republic.
(5) At least 30 per cent of the arable land used by a person engaged in agriculture located in a nitrate vulnerable zone must be covered with vegetation from 1 November to 31 March. One-third of this percentage may be kept as stubble.
(6) For the purposes of this Act, vegetation cover is understood to mean winter crops, such as winter cereals, winter oilseed rape, winter turnip rape, grasses and legumes, and medicinal and aromatic plants.
(7) The location and restrictions of important springs and karst funnels in a nitrate vulnerable zone are kept in the relevant register.
§ 169. General requirements for grazing in a water protection zone
(1) Grazing in a water protection zone may not cause:
1) bank erosion or the littering of a water body;
2) damage to aquatic life or fish spawning grounds;
3) a negative impact on the public use of a water body or the use of a shore path;
4) damage to a protected water body or cultural heritage;
5) other significant environmental nuisance in a water body;
6) disruption of the proper functioning of a land improvement system.
(2) Animals grazed on a pasture with a water protection zone may not be given supplementary feed, except for mineral feed.
(3) By way of derogation from the provision of subsection 2 of this section, the giving of supplementary feed is permitted during the spring transition to pasture feed and in the event of a shortage of pasture grass due to unfavourable conditions.
(4) The places for giving supplementary feed must be located outside the water protection zone.
(5) Along the bank of a water body other than the sea, at least five metres of the bank strip must be ensured for each livestock unit.
(6) If the size of the herd is ten livestock units or more, a person intending to graze must notify the Environmental Board of the planned activity once during the growing season by submitting a notification to the Environmental Board through the information system at least 14 days before starting to graze.
(7) If the Environmental Board does not notify the submitter of the notification within 14 days of receiving the notification of the need to amend or check the data submitted in the notification, grazing in the water protection zone may be started.
Page 42 / 72
Water Act
(8) If it becomes apparent during grazing that the grazing requirements provided for in subsections 1–6 of this section and in § 170 are not met, the Environmental Board may set additional conditions for grazing or prohibit grazing.
(9) A person who grazes animals of less than ten livestock units must comply with the requirements provided for in subsections 1–5 of this section and in § 170, and subsection 8 of this section may be applied to them.
(10) The data composition of the notification mentioned in subsection 6 of this section and the procedure for submitting the notification shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 170. Additional requirements for grazing in the water protection zone of a water body other than the sea
(1) Grazing in the water protection zone of a water body other than the sea is prohibited from 1 November to 30 April.
(2) Grazing is not permitted:
1) in the water protection zone of important springs and karst funnels mentioned in the protection rules for the Pandivere and Adavere-Põltsamaa nitrate vulnerable zone;
2) on sections of a water body that are a habitat for the freshwater pearl mussel (*Margaritifera margaritifera*);
3) in forest land within the meaning of clause 2 of § 3(2) of the Forest Act located in a water protection zone.
(3) In forest land located in a water protection zone, access of animals to water is permitted if there is a forest strip between the pasture and the water body along the entire length of the grazed area.
§ 171. Keeping farm animals in outdoor conditions
(1) When keeping farm animals in outdoor conditions, the pollution of surface water and groundwater must be prevented.
(2) The requirements for reducing the environmental risk and preventing the environmental hazard arising from keeping farm animals in outdoor conditions shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Division 8
Use of Sewage Sludge
§ 172. Use of sewage sludge in landscaping, recultivation and agriculture
(1) In landscaping, recultivation and the cultivation of short-rotation coppice in agriculture, only stabilised or stabilised and hygienised sewage sludge may be used.
(2) Sewage sludge for the purposes of this division is a mixture of water and solid matter separated from sewage by physical, biological or chemical methods.
(3) In agriculture, except for the cultivation of short-rotation coppice, only stabilised and hygienised sewage sludge may be used.
(4) Sewage sludge used in landscaping, recultivation and agriculture must comply with the quality standards established on the basis of subsection 5 of this section and other requirements.
(5) The quality standards for sewage sludge used in landscaping, recultivation and agriculture and the requirements for its use shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 173. Keeping records of the use of sewage sludge
(1) A user of sewage sludge must keep a logbook on the use of sewage sludge or enter the data in the field book.
(2) The obligation to keep a logbook and a field book does not extend to a natural person for the personal use of sewage sludge.
(3) A sewage sludge handler, who is a waste handler for the purposes of the Waste Act, must keep a logbook on the treatment and delivery of sludge for use.
(4) A user and a handler of sewage sludge must keep the data on the use or handling of sewage sludge for five years.
Division 9
Water Act
Page 43 / 72
Damming of a Water Body, Lowering of the Water Level
and Removal of a Dam
§ 174. Damming of a water body
(1) The damming of a water body is an activity by which the natural water level of a flowing water body is raised by more than 0.3 metres with a structure built in the flowing water body (hereinafter *dam*).
(2) A local government unit shall coordinate the draft of the design conditions and building permit of a dam with the Environmental Board. The Environmental Board shall grant or refuse to grant coordination within ten days of receiving the request for coordination. If an additional analysis is required, the Environmental Board shall extend the deadline for coordination by 20 days. The deadline for the procedure for design conditions and building permits provided for in the Building Code shall be extended by the deadline for granting coordination.
(3) A dam built on a water body or section thereof designated as a spawning and habitat for salmon, brown trout, sea trout and grayling on the basis of § 51(2) of the Nature Conservation Act must have its owner or possessor ensure the passage of fish both upstream and downstream of the dam.
(4) The Environmental Board may, by a water permit, relax the obligation to ensure the passage of fish provided for in subsection 3 of this section or release the owner of the dam from the said obligation, taking into account the existence of a significant reason.
(5) The owner or possessor of a dam is obliged to:
1) ensure the technical serviceability of the dam and, where necessary, its maintenance;
2) ensure the protection of aquatic life at the dam, including, at the request of the Environmental Board, the passage of fish both upstream and downstream of the dam, on water bodies not mentioned in subsection 3 of this section;
3) ensure the ecological minimum flow or the natural flow below the hydraulic structure in the natural channel if the natural flow is less than the ecological minimum flow;
4) notify the Environmental Inspectorate and the Emergency Response Centre of an accident or a threat of an accident at the dam without delay and, in the case of a structure that is part of a land improvement system, also the Agricultural Board;
5) eliminate an accident or a threat of an accident at the dam.
(6) A hydraulic structure is a facility which allows for the use of river, lake, sea or groundwater or which prevents the destructive effect of water.
(7) The ecological minimum flow is the flow of a flowing water body which ensures the functioning of the ecosystem.
(8) The Environmental Board has the right to require the ensuring of the passage of fish on water bodies not mentioned in subsection 3 of this section, taking into account an expert opinion or the results of an environmental impact assessment.
(9) The specified requirements for the damming of a water body, environmental monitoring related to damming, the protection of aquatic life and a dam, and the methodology for determining the ecological minimum flow shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 175. Lowering the water level of a water body and removing a dam
(1) The lowering of the water level of a water body is an activity by which the existing water level of a flowing water body is lowered by more than 0.3 metres.
(2) The conditions for lowering the water level of a water body are determined in a water permit.
(3) If a water permit is not required for damming in accordance with clause 3 of § 188(1) of this Act, the requirements established on the basis of subsection 7 of this section must be followed when lowering the water level of a water body and removing a dam.
(4) If the owner or possessor of a dam has not applied for a water permit required by a legal act or if the permit issuer refuses to grant a permit, the owner or possessor of the dam must remove the dam.
(5) When lowering the water level of a water body or removing a dam, the owner or possessor of the dam must:
1) avoid damaging the channel and aquatic life downstream of the dam by changing the flow;
2) avoid the discharge of sediments and debris into the channel downstream of the dam;
3) restore the dammed area.
(6) In the event of lowering the water level of a water body or removing a dam, the Environmental Board may set environmental protection conditions related to the lowering of the water level, the prevention of the discharge of sediments and debris into the channel downstream of the dam, and the restoration of the dammed area.
(7) The specified requirements for lowering the water level of a water body and removing a dam shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Page 44 / 72
Water Act
Division 10
Dredging and Dumping in a Water Body
§ 176. Dredging of a water body
(1) Dredging of a water body for the purposes of this Act is the removal of sediment from the bottom of a water body, unless it is carried out during the maintenance of a land improvement system.
(2) In determining the required volume of dredging, the need and volume of dredging must, if possible, be taken into account at the time of registering the activity or granting a water permit and in the future in such a way that the water body is affected as little as possible.
§ 177. Dumping
(1) Dumping is prohibited, except in the cases provided for in subsections 4 and 5 of this section.
(2) Dumping for the purposes of this Act is:
1) any deliberate disposal of waste or other matter or things from a vessel, aircraft, platform or other sea-based installation into the sea or their burial at the seabed;
2) the deliberate sinking of vessels, aircraft, platforms or other sea-based installations;
3) the abandonment or toppling over of platforms or other sea-based installations at their place of use for the purpose of their disposal.
(3) The following are not considered dumping for the purposes of this Act:
1) the discharge into the sea of waste or other matter or things incidental to or arising from the normal operation of vessels, aircraft, platforms or other sea-based installations and their equipment, except for waste or other matter or things transported by vessels or aircraft for the purpose of their sinking or treatment, or generated on board such vessels, aircraft, platforms or other sea-based installations during the treatment of such waste or other matter or things, or transported to platforms or other sea-based installations for the purpose of their dumping;
2) the disposal of waste or other matter or things into the sea for a purpose other than their deliberate disposal;
3) the disposal or burial at sea of waste or other matter or things directly resulting from or related to the exploration, exploitation and associated off-shore processing of seabed mineral resources.
(4) Only dredged material may be dumped into the Baltic Sea, provided that it does not endanger vessel traffic.
(5) Outside the Baltic Sea, other matter and things may also be dumped into the sea on the basis of a permit.
(6) If a permit under the legislation of a coastal state is not provided for for dumping mentioned in subsection 5 of this section, a water permit for this shall be granted by the Ministry of the Environment. The granting of this permit shall be based on the requirements of international agreements, in particular the 1996 Protocol to the 1972 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter. In granting a water permit, the conditions of the dumping site must be taken into account, among other things.
(7) In determining a dumping site, the possible physical, biological and chemical characteristics of the dumping site in the water column and at the seabed, the mineral deposits located at the dumping site, other uses of the dumping site and the activity taking place there, the potential use of the dumping site for other economic activities, and the possible impact of dumping on marine protected areas and protected species or ecosystems related to them must be taken into account.
§ 178. Incineration
(1) The incineration of waste or other matter or things at sea is prohibited.
(2) Incineration for the purposes of this Act is the burning of waste or other matter or things on a vessel, platform or other sea-based installation at sea for the purpose of their deliberate disposal.
(3) Outside the Baltic Sea, the burning of waste or other matter or things on a vessel, platform or other sea-based installation at sea is not considered incineration for the purposes of this Act if such waste, other matter or things have been generated during the normal operation of the vessel, platform or other sea-based installation.
§ 179. Dumping and incineration under special circumstances
(1) The prohibition of dumping provided for in § 177(1) and the prohibition of incineration provided for in § 178(1) do not apply if, due to force majeure caused by severe weather conditions, there is an immediate threat to human life, a vessel, an aircraft, a platform or other sea-based installation, and:
Water Act
Page 45 / 72
1) it is necessary to ensure their safety and dumping or incineration is the only way to avert the said threat and it is likely that the damage caused by dumping or incineration is less than the damage caused by refraining from dumping or incineration;
2) it is a matter of overriding public interest.
(2) In the case provided for in subsection 1 of this section, measures must be taken during dumping or incineration to ensure that the environmental risk is as small as possible.
(3) The prohibition of dumping and the prohibition of incineration do not apply in a situation of environmental hazard for which there is no other reasonable solution. In such a case, the damage caused to the environment by dumping or incineration must be avoided if possible, taking into account the time during which measures must be taken to eliminate the said threat.
(4) A person must notify the Environmental Inspectorate without delay and, if possible, in advance of the need to apply the derogations provided for in subsection 3 of this section.
(5) In the application of the derogations provided for in subsections 1 and 3, a person shall immediately provide the Environmental Inspectorate with information on the circumstances which gave rise to the application of the derogations, and the exact data of the dumping or incineration.
(6) The Environmental Inspectorate shall notify the Ministry of the Environment without delay of the incidents of the application of the derogations provided for in subsections 1 and 3. The Ministry of the Environment shall, if possible, arrange for prior coordination of the dumping or incineration with the competent authorities of those states which are or may be affected by the dumping or incineration, or for their and the International Maritime Organization’s immediate notification of the dumping or incineration that has already taken place.
§ 180. Sinking and disposal of waste in an inland water body and placement in groundwater
(1) Only such waste whose effect in water does not create an environmental hazard may be sunk, disposed of or placed in groundwater in an inland water body.
(2) The Environmental Board shall grant a permit for the sinking or disposal of waste in an inland water body or for its placement in groundwater with the consent of the local government unit and, in the case of an inland water body in private ownership, also with the consent of the owner of the water body.
§ 181. Installation of submarine cables and pipelines at sea
(1) Submarine cables and pipelines may be installed at sea which do not impede the normal use of the water body or lose their consumer value within a reasonably short period of time, based on the principle that the water body is affected as little as possible.
(2) Submarine cables and pipelines must be operated in a way that prevents environmental hazards and causes as little environmental nuisance as possible.
§ 182. Prohibition of the storage of carbon dioxide in a marine area
(1) The storage of carbon dioxide in a marine area is prohibited.
(2) The storage of carbon dioxide in a marine area for the purposes of this Act is the injection of carbon dioxide into the water column or at the seabed or its storage in geological formations under the seabed in a marine area.
Division 11
Water Traffic
§ 183. Water traffic requirements
(1) The use of a public and publicly used water body for traffic is permitted unless restricted by law or another legal act.
(2) If a water body in the ownership of a private person is not designated for public use, traffic on it is permitted only with the permission of the owner.
(3) A person navigating on a water body is obliged to avoid infringing the rights of landowners and other users of the water and water, and damaging aquatic life, the channel of the water body, banks, hydraulic structures and utility networks.
(4) No one may endanger water traffic. A boat jetty and a marked fishing gear may obstruct up to one-third of the width of the flowing water body used for water traffic.
(5) On a water body or part thereof in the list of public bathing places prepared by the Health Board, traffic with watercraft, except for watercraft performing official duties, is prohibited.
Page 46 / 72
(6) The use of vehicles with internal combustion engines is prohibited on an impounded lake and an artificial lake belonging to a drinking water intake established on the basis of § 86(4) of this Act.
(7) The requirements for the keeping and use of watercraft on public and publicly used inland water bodies, except for navigable water bodies, shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(8) On public and publicly used inland water bodies, except for navigable water bodies, the requirements for the speed measurement procedure for speedometers and speed measurement systems for controlling the speed of watercraft and for the processing of measurement results shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(9) The use of water bodies in aviation is regulated by the Aviation Act.
§ 184. Right of a local government unit to prohibit and restrict water traffic
(1) A local government unit has the right, by an order, to prohibit traffic with watercraft on a public or publicly used water body within its administrative unit, to establish a speed limit and to prohibit going onto the ice of a water body if the traffic, the speed of the watercraft or going onto the ice:
1) endangers water traffic;
2) damages or may damage the status of the water body and erode the banks of the water body;
3) damages or may damage fish stocks or the condition of fish spawning grounds;
4) disturbs other users of the water body;
5) endangers those going onto the ice.
(2) An order of a local government unit under subsection 1 of this section shall be made public in a local or national newspaper and on the website of the local government unit.
(3) The traffic signs regulating watercraft traffic necessary for marking the orders under subsection 1 of this section shall be installed by the issuer of the order. The installation of the traffic signs shall be coordinated with the Transport Administration.
§ 185. Water traffic on a navigation channel and use of a navigation channel
(1) On a navigation channel established on a legal basis by dredging the bottom of a publicly used water body, which is located outside the water area of a port, water traffic shall be organised by the administrator of the navigation channel.
(2) The administrator of a navigation channel for the purposes of this Act is the owner of the water body or a person to whom the right to administer the navigation channel has been transferred by an agreement in accordance with the procedure provided for in legal acts.
(3) The use of a navigation channel is considered to be the passage of such a vessel along a navigation channel which, due to its draught, cannot navigate on that water body without using the navigation channel.
Division 12
Water Permit
§ 186. Special use of water
(1) The right to the special use of water is based on a water permit, which grants the right to one or more activities referred to in § 187 of this Act, and an integrated permit.
(2) For the special use of water on another person's land plot, the user must also have the consent of the landowner. The consent of the landowner is not required for the use of such a land plot which is located under a water body belonging to the state or which is considered to be in the ownership of the state on the basis of § 31(2) of the Land Reform Act.
§ 187. Obligation to have a water permit
Unless otherwise provided for in § 188 of this Act, a water permit is obligatory if:
1) surface water, including ice, is abstracted in an amount of more than 30 cubic metres per day;
2) groundwater is abstracted in an amount of more than 150 cubic metres per month or more than 10 cubic metres per day;
3) mineral water is abstracted;
4) pollutants or wastewater and cooling water are discharged into a receiving body;
5) effluent is discharged directly into groundwater in accordance with subsections 3 and 5 of § 126 of this Act;
6) storm water is discharged into a receiving body from a landfill, an industrial territory, the land of port facilities, peat industry land and other places where there is a risk of pollution or a threat to the status of a water body;
7) a water body is dammed or hydropower is used;
8) a water body is dredged or dredged material with a volume of 100 cubic metres or more is placed on the bottom of a water body;
9) water removed during the extraction of a mineral resource is discharged into a receiving body;
10) solid substances with a volume of 100 cubic metres or more are placed in a water body;
Page 47 / 72
11) dumping is carried out with a volume of 100 cubic metres or more;
12) groundwater is replenished, diverted or returned;
13) a vessel is regularly serviced or repaired with hazardous substances or if bulk cargo that is dusty in the wind is regularly loaded or unloaded from a vessel, unless this is done using a closed system;
14) chemicals are used for cleaning a water body, unless this significantly changes the physical or chemical or biological properties of the water;
15) aquaculture is developed with a production increase of more than one tonne per year;
16) a standing water body or a wetland with an area of more than one hectare is established or a standing water body or a wetland with an area of more than 0.1 hectare is eliminated, except for a water body created during the extraction of a mineral resource;
17) the shoreline of a water body included in a body of surface water, a natural lake not included in a body of surface water or an artificial lake with a water mirror area of more than one hectare is modified, except for a water body created or modified during the extraction of a mineral resource;
18) the physical or chemical properties, the biological properties or the water regime of water are significantly changed.
§ 188. Activities not requiring a water permit
(1) A water permit is not required for:
1) the abstraction of water in an emergency, for responding to a rescue event or for simulating the said events during exercises;
2) the drainage of groundwater from an area with a high groundwater level or an excessively moist area for the operation and protection of a lawfully constructed building;
3) damming if the natural water level of a flowing water body is raised by up to one metre, unless a water body or section thereof which requires protection and is included in the list established on the basis of § 51(2) of the Nature Conservation Act as a spawning and habitat for salmon, brown trout, sea trout and grayling is dammed;
4) the construction and maintenance of a land improvement system;
5) the modification of the shoreline of an artificial lake not included in a body of surface water if the artificial lake has been created as a result of extraction, is located on a mineral deposit, a mining claim or a service area of a mining claim and the land disturbed by extraction has not yet been declared restored by the issuer of the extraction permit in accordance with the procedure provided for in §§ 48 and 50 of the Earth’s Crust Act;
6) the discharge of up to one cubic metre of wastewater per day into a water body or up to five cubic metres of wastewater per day into the soil if this activity complies with the requirements for discharge into a receiving body established on the basis of § 128(7) of this Act.
(2) If the planning or reconstruction of a land improvement system mentioned in clause 4 of subsection 1 of this section is related to a water body which is included in the list of spawning and habitat for salmon, brown trout, sea trout and grayling established on the basis of § 51(2) of the Nature Conservation Act, the building permit for the land improvement system must be coordinated with the Environmental Board.
§ 189. Period of validity of a water permit
(1) A water permit is of unspecified duration, unless:
1) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
2) the special use of water is a one-off event;
3) groundwater is abstracted from an established groundwater reserve.
4) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
5) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
(2) In the case referred to in clause 2 of subsection 1, a water permit is granted for the duration of the activity.
(3) In the case referred to in clause 3 of subsection 1, a water permit is not granted for a period longer than the validity of the established groundwater reserve.
(4) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
(5) [Repealed - RT I, 21.12.2019, 1 - entry into force 01.01.2020]
§ 190. Application for a water permit
(1) In addition to that provided for in § 42(1) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act, an applicant for a water permit shall submit:
1) at the request of the Environmental Board, a project for the works related to the special use of water;
2) at the request of the Environmental Board, data on the environment affected by the planned activity.
(2) In the collection of the data mentioned in clause 2 of subsection 1, the principles, methods and methodology established on the basis of § 53(5) of this Act shall be followed, taking into account the nature of the planned activity.
(3) If a water study is required when applying for a water permit, the applicant for the water permit must ensure that the water study complies with the requirements for a water study provided for in §§ 236, 237 and 243. The costs of the water study shall be borne by the applicant for the water permit.
(4) A person who applies for a water permit for the damming of a water body must have the written consent of the landowner whose land's moisture regime is affected by the damming.
Page 48 / 72
Water Act
§ 191. Procedure for granting a water permit
(1) The Environmental Board shall grant a water permit, except in the case referred to in § 177(6).
(2) The permit issuer shall coordinate the dumping site specified in the water permit with the Transport Administration before granting the permit.
(3) The procedure for granting a water permit shall be extended by the time required for the assessment and establishment of a groundwater reserve, but not by more than 24 months.
(4) A water permit shall be granted by a decision without an open procedure if a faster procedure is necessary to prevent an environmental hazard.
(5) In deciding on the granting of a water permit, the adequacy of the established groundwater reserve and the amount of surface water must be assessed and the satisfaction of the drinking water needs of the population, health care, welfare, educational and child care institutions and the food industry must be ensured as a matter of priority.
§ 192. Refusal to grant a water permit
(1) The Environmental Board shall refuse to grant a water permit in the cases provided for in clause 1 and clauses 3–10 of § 52(1) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act or if the applicant for a water permit does not have the consent of the landowner of the location of the activity for the use of the immovable in the latter's ownership or if the consent referred to in § 190(4) of this Act is missing.
(2) The Environmental Board may grant a water permit for the damming of a water body without the consent referred to in § 190(4) if there is an overriding public interest in the damming of the water body.
(3) The granting of a water permit may also be refused if at least one of the following grounds exists:
1) it is planned to discharge wastewater into the sanitary protection zone or maintenance area of a water intake;
2) the Health Board does not coordinate the application for a permit for the use of a public water supply borehole under the Building Code;
3) it is planned to discharge hazardous substances into the sanitary protection zone, maintenance area or recharge area of a drinking water intake;
4) it is planned to discharge hazardous substances into an area designated for the protection of an economically significant aquatic species or into a habitat and an area designated for the protection of a species under the Nature Conservation Act, where water quality is an important protection factor;
5) the abstraction of water does not ensure the satisfaction of the drinking water needs of the population, health care, welfare, educational and child care institutions and the food industry;
6) the abstraction of groundwater may exceed the established groundwater reserve;
7) a groundwater reserve has not been established;
8) the planned activity endangers the achievement of the water protection objectives referred to in §§ 31, 32 and 34 of this Act or does not allow for their achievement and a derogation is not applied for the achievement of the water protection objectives under §§ 39–42;
9) for dumping, there are alternative possibilities for the re-use or disposal of dredged material on land in a way that does not pose a threat to human health or the environment and is not disproportionately costly;
10) the environmental hazard to human health or the environment resulting from dumping cannot be determined with sufficient accuracy.
§ 193. Content of a water permit
(1) In addition to that provided for in § 53 of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act, a water permit shall, depending on the type of special use of water, indicate:
1) the permitted quantities and times of water abstraction by water intake and aquifer;
2) the requirements for keeping records of the quantity of water abstracted from a water body, the control of water quality, including monitoring, and the abstracted water;
3) the requirements for the control of groundwater quality and the measurement of the groundwater level and the requirements for keeping records of the quantity of water abstracted from an aquifer and the abstracted groundwater;
4) the maximum permitted content of pollutants, including hazardous substances, in wastewater and the emission loads of pollutants by substance and outfall;
5) monitoring requirements, including monitoring requirements for the affected receiving body;
6) measures to prevent environmental hazards and reduce environmental risks and the deadlines for their implementation;
7) measures which reduce or prevent the impact of activities on a body of surface water, a body of groundwater or the property of a person, and the requirements for monitoring the effectiveness of these measures;
8) the best available techniques for water use and sewage treatment, taking into account its timeliness and efficiency, its economic and technical accessibility to the special user of water;
9) requirements for the submission of information to the permit issuer;
10) requirements for the damming of a water body and the use of hydropower;
11) requirements for sea dredging and the sinking or dumping of solid substances into the sea;
12) requirements for aquaculture;
13) where necessary, other requirements for the activities for which a water permit is obligatory under § 187 of this Act, depending on the type and extent of the activity;
Water Act
Page 49 / 72
14) information which must be entered in the environmental permit in accordance with the data composition established on the basis of § 53(3) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act.
(2) In a water permit, the relevant measures provided for in clauses 7 and 8 of § 53(1) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act shall be determined on the basis of the type of special use of water.
§ 194. Suspension and revocation of a water permit
(1) In addition to the grounds provided for in § 61(1) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act, the Environmental Board shall, where necessary, suspend the validity of a permit for the abstraction of water for the production of drinking water if the content of hazardous substances in the surface water or groundwater used for drinking water exceeds the quality standard. The Environmental Board shall coordinate the suspension of the validity of the water permit in such a case with the Health Board.
(2) In addition to the grounds provided for in § 62(2) of the General Part of the Environmental Code Act, the Environmental Board may revoke a water permit if:
1) wastewater is discharged into the sanitary protection zone of a water intake;
2) hazardous substances are discharged into an area designated for the protection of an economically significant aquatic species or into the sanitary protection zone of a water intake;
3) the established groundwater reserve is exceeded or the over-abstraction of groundwater is caused by the abstraction of groundwater;
4) the activity has deteriorated the status of water and this deterioration is not in accordance with the requirements provided for in §§ 39–42 of this Act regarding derogations for the achievement of water protection objectives;
5) the content of hazardous substances in the surface water or groundwater used for drinking water exceeds the quality standard.
(3) The Environmental Board shall coordinate the revocation of a water permit in the case provided for in clause 5 of subsection 2 with the Health Board.
(4) If the established groundwater reserve is exceeded in an emergency or for responding to a rescue event, the Environmental Board shall not revoke the water permit.
(5) If a water permit is granted for the use of an unestablished groundwater reserve, the permit issuer may amend the water permit or revoke it after the establishment of the groundwater reserve.
(6) If the permitted amount of groundwater removal is exceeded during the extraction of a mineral resource in order to prevent the flooding of mine workings, the Environmental Board shall not revoke the water permit or impose sanctions for exceeding the permitted amount of groundwater.
§ 195. Water use report
(1) The holder of a water permit or an integrated permit is obliged to submit a report to the issuer of the environmental permit once a year on the activity referred to in clauses 1–6, 9, 11, 15 and 18 of § 187 of this Act. The holder of a water permit or an integrated permit shall submit a report if the activity referred to in clauses 8 and 10 of § 187 takes place at sea.
(2) The report on the activity referred to in subsection 1 of this section must, depending on the permitted activity, contain:
1) data on the water used, the amount of wastewater and the amount of pollutants discharged into a receiving body;
2) data on mine water, storm water and cooling water;
3) economic indicators of public water supply and sewerage services and water use;
4) data on a sewage treatment plant and sewage sludge;
5) the composition and volume of the material removed and dumped during sea dredging and dumping;
6) data on water from aquaculture and aquaculture;
7) where necessary, other relevant data.
(3) The specified data composition to be presented in the report referred to in subsection 1 of this section and the procedure for submitting the report shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
Division 13
Activity with a Water Environment Risk
§ 196. Registration of an activity with a water environment risk
(1) The registration of an activity with a water environment risk (hereinafter also *registration*) grants the right to one or more of the activities referred to in subsection 2 of this section.
(2) An activity with a water environment risk must be registered in the case of the following activities:
1) the use of dispersants for the elimination of pollution or for preventing the spread of pollutants in a water body;
2) the dredging of a water body other than the sea or the placement of dredged material with a volume of 5-100 cubic metres on the bottom of such a water body;
3) sea dredging or the placement of dredged material with a volume of 50-100 cubic metres on the seabed;
4) the construction of a bridge or a culvert belonging to a road or a railway on a publicly used water body or a public water body;
5) the placement of 5–100 cubic metres of solid matter in a water body;
Page 50 / 72
Water Act
6) aquaculture with a production increase of up to one tonne per year if the water system of the aquaculture facility is connected to a body of surface water;
7) the installation of a ground-source heat pump system in a water body;
8) the direct discharge of groundwater that has passed through an open-loop ground-source heat pump system into groundwater;
9) the removal of a dam or the lowering of the water level of a water body to a level for which a water permit is no longer required;
10) the direct discharge of substances into groundwater for scientific purposes for the description and protection of surface water and groundwater or for the improvement of the status of a body of groundwater in the amount which is essential for the said purpose;
11) the sinking of an object with cultural value in an area designated by a plan;
12) the use of a chemical plant protection product in a water protection zone.
(3) A dispersant for the purposes of this Act is a mixture of surfactants which is used in the event of a spillage of petroleum products into the environment to enhance the dissolution of petroleum products in water in the composition of an organic solvent in order to reduce the surface tension between petroleum products and water.
(4) The Environmental Board shall register an activity with a water environment risk, except for the activity referred to in clause 1 of subsection 2, which is registered by the Environmental Inspectorate.
(5) The Environmental Board may require an application for a water permit for an activity with a water environment risk referred to in clause 12 of subsection 2 if the activity may have a significant adverse effect on the properties of surface water and groundwater.
§ 197. Application for the registration of an activity with a water environment risk
(1) A person planning an activity with a water environment risk (hereinafter in this division *applicant*) shall submit an application for the registration of the activity at least one month before starting that activity.
(2) The application shall state the applicant's data and a characterisation, description and other necessary information of the planned activity with a water environment risk mentioned in the legal act established on the basis of subsection 3 of this section.
(3) The data composition of the application for the registration of an activity with a water environment risk and of the registration shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) If several activities with a water environment risk are planned and these activities are spatially or technologically related, these activities shall be indicated in one application.
(5) For the registration of an activity with a water environment risk referred to in clause 1 of § 196(2) of this Act, an application is not required, but the Environmental Inspectorate must be notified of the intention to use dispersants by means of communication.
§ 198. Decision on the registration of an activity with a water environment risk
(1) The Environmental Board shall, on the basis of the submitted application, check within ten working days of receiving the application the need for a water permit or registration and the compliance of the submitted application with the requirements. If the activity with a water environment risk does not require registration or requires a water permit, the Environmental Board shall notify the applicant thereof within 15 days of receiving the application.
(2) The Environmental Board shall decide on the registration of the applicant's activity with a water environment risk or on the refusal to register it within 30 days of receiving an application that complies with the requirements. If the application is not reviewed within the time limit, the activity with a water environment risk of the applicant is not considered to be tacitly registered upon expiry of the time limit.
(3) A decision on the registration of an activity with a water environment risk referred to in clause 1 of § 196(2) of this Act shall be made by the Environmental Inspectorate without delay.
(4) The applicant's activity with a water environment risk shall be registered according to the application for a fixed term or for an unspecified term. The Environmental Board may limit the period of validity of the registration in the case provided for in subsection 5 of this section.
(5) The Environmental Board may, upon registration, establish ancillary conditions for an activity with a water environment risk if this is necessary to reduce the adverse effect of the activity on the properties of surface water or groundwater, on aquatic life or on life associated with water.
§ 199. Refusal to register an activity with a water environment risk
(1) The Environmental Board shall refuse to register an activity with a water environment risk if:
1) the activity may have a significant adverse effect on the properties of surface water or groundwater, on aquatic life or on life associated with water, which cannot be sufficiently reduced by establishing ancillary conditions;
2) the applicant has knowingly submitted false information which affects the decision on the registration of the activity;
3) the activity requires a water permit or an integrated permit.
Page 51 / 72
Water Act
(2) The Environmental Inspectorate shall refuse to register an activity with a water environment risk referred to in clause 1 of § 196(2) of this Act if the adverse effect on the properties of surface water or groundwater, on aquatic life or on life associated with water caused by the use of dispersants is not justified, taking into account the nature or extent of the pollution or the spread of pollutants.
§ 200. Obligation to report a change in circumstances
(1) In the event of a change of the person carrying out a registered activity with a water environment risk, the new person carrying out the activity shall immediately notify the Environmental Board of the change in the data mentioned in the registration.
(2) The Environmental Board must be notified in good time of the intention to change a registered activity with a water environment risk and of other circumstances which may have a significant adverse effect on the properties of surface water or groundwater, on aquatic life or on life associated with water.
§ 201. Amendment of a registration
(1) The Environmental Board or the Environmental Inspectorate shall amend a registration:
1) at the request of the holder of the registration;
2) if it becomes apparent that the registered data have changed;
3) if it is necessary to establish or amend ancillary conditions for a registered activity with a water environment risk in order to reduce the adverse effect of the activity on the properties of surface water or groundwater, on aquatic life or on life associated with water and to avoid the revocation of the registration.
(2) If the amendment of a registration is initiated by the Environmental Board, it shall notify the holder of the registration in writing of the reason for amending the registration and shall set a deadline for submitting the data and documents necessary for the amendment, which may not be shorter than ten working days from the date of making the relevant notification public.
(3) The Environmental Board shall decide on the amendment of a registration in accordance with the procedure provided for the registration of an activity within ten days of receiving a proper application.
§ 202. Revocation of a registration
(1) The Environmental Board shall revoke a registration if:
1) the holder of the registration has submitted an application for this;
2) it becomes apparent that the registration application contained knowingly submitted false information of material importance which affected the registration of the activity with a water environment risk and in the absence of which the registration should have been refused.
(2) The Environmental Board may revoke a registration if a ground for refusal to register provided for in § 199 of this Act becomes apparent.
(3) The procedure for revoking a registration shall be subject to subsections 2 and 3 of § 201 of this Act.
Chapter 7
Assessment, Establishment of a Groundwater Reserve
and Carrying Out of Hydrogeological Works
Division 1
Assessment and Establishment of a Groundwater Reserve
§ 203. Groundwater reserve
(1) A groundwater reserve is divided into a prospective reserve and a usable reserve depending on the detail of the study.
(2) A groundwater reserve for the purposes of this Act is a calculated amount of groundwater abstracted for the provision of water services or for own use, the use of which ensures that there is no over-abstraction of groundwater and the status of groundwater does not deteriorate in the area with the established groundwater reserve.
(3) A groundwater reserve established in accordance with § 205(1) of this Act shall be entered in the relevant register by a decision of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 204. Assessment of a groundwater reserve
(1) A groundwater reserve must be assessed if the water abstraction of a groundwater intake from one aquifer is greater than 500 cubic metres per day.
Page 52 / 72
Water Act
(2) A groundwater reserve may also be assessed if the water abstraction of a groundwater intake from one aquifer is less than 500 cubic metres per day and such water abstraction causes or may cause over-abstraction of water in the aquifer.
(3) The Environmental Board shall decide on the need to assess a groundwater reserve if more than 500 cubic metres of groundwater per day is abstracted from an aquifer for the purpose of groundwater diversion.
(4) The assessment of a groundwater reserve shall be based on the natural resource of a body of groundwater. In assessing a groundwater reserve, the hydrogeological conditions of the aquifer, including the protection of groundwater, the preservation of ecosystems dependent on groundwater, existing areas with established groundwater reserves and water intakes, the impact of human activity, the location of contaminated soil and groundwater areas, and potential hazardous pollution sources in the area must be taken into account.
(5) A hydrogeological survey shall be carried out for the assessment of a groundwater reserve, the conduct of which shall be coordinated by the Ministry of the Environment, and a survey report shall be prepared, which shall be submitted to the groundwater commission.
(6) The costs associated with the assessment of a groundwater reserve shall be borne by the person who applies for the assessment of the groundwater reserve.
(7) The procedure for the assessment of a groundwater reserve, the requirements for the assessment of a groundwater reserve and for the report of a hydrogeological survey of a groundwater reserve, and the composition of the data on which the establishment of a groundwater reserve is based shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 205. Establishment of a groundwater reserve
(1) A groundwater reserve shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area after the assessment of the groundwater reserve.
(2) A groundwater reserve shall be established for 10–30 years.
(3) A groundwater reserve must be established before a water permit is granted for the abstraction of groundwater.
(4) The minister responsible for the area shall not establish a groundwater reserve if:
1) the properties of the water of the groundwater reserve do not correspond to the intended purpose of use;
2) the use of the groundwater reserve in the requested amount may deteriorate the status of the groundwater;
3) a sanitary protection zone project has not been prepared for the planned groundwater intake;
4) it is not possible to observe the activity restrictions in the sanitary protection zone, maintenance area or recharge area of a drinking water intake;
5) there is no justified need for the use of the groundwater reserve.
§ 206. Re-assessment of a groundwater reserve
(1) A groundwater reserve shall be re-assessed before the establishment of the groundwater reserve.
(2) A groundwater reserve shall be re-assessed if:
1) the period of use of the groundwater reserve has exceeded the calculated period of use of the groundwater reserve and the planned water abstraction is still greater than 500 cubic metres per day;
2) the hydrogeological conditions of the area with the groundwater reserve have changed;
3) the status of the groundwater of the area with the groundwater reserve has deteriorated and no longer corresponds to the purpose of use of the groundwater reserve;
4) the chemical or quantitative status has deteriorated to such an extent that the body of groundwater located in the area with the established groundwater reserve is at risk or its status class has changed from good to poor;
5) the use of the groundwater reserve may cause the deterioration of the status of surface water or adverse changes in a terrestrial ecosystem dependent on groundwater;
6) it is desired to abstract more water from the aquifer than the established groundwater reserve;
7) there is a need to significantly change the location of the groundwater intake or the groundwater intake does not have a sanitary protection zone.
(3) A groundwater reserve may also be re-assessed if, according to the water abstraction data, the established volume of the groundwater reserve is not used.
(4) A groundwater reserve shall be re-assessed in accordance with the requirements for the assessment of a groundwater reserve and the survey of a groundwater reserve and the procedure for the assessment of a groundwater reserve and on the basis of the distribution of groundwater reserves. The re-assessment survey of a groundwater reserve shall be subject to the requirements established on the basis of § 204(7) of this Act.
(5) The costs associated with the re-assessment of a groundwater reserve shall be covered in accordance with § 204(6) of this Act.
§ 207. Groundwater commission
(1) A groundwater commission shall be formed for the determination of groundwater reserves, including mineral water reserves, and for the organisation of surveys and expert assessments.
(2) The tasks of the groundwater commission are:
Water Act
Page 53 / 72
1) to review the results of surveys carried out for the assessment of a groundwater reserve and to make proposals to the minister responsible for the area for the establishment of a groundwater reserve;
2) to assess the situation of the study, use and protection of groundwater and to determine the need for and directions of surveys;
3) to advise the Ministry of the Environment and its administrative authorities on issues related to the use and protection of groundwater;
4) to give an assessment of the need for and results of hydrogeological surveys and of draft legal acts concerning groundwater.
(3) The statutes of the groundwater commission shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
(4) The composition of the groundwater commission shall be established by a directive of the minister responsible for the area.
Division 2
Activity Licence for Hydrogeological Works
§ 208. Licence obligation for a person carrying out hydrogeological works
An undertaking must have an activity licence for carrying out the following hydrogeological works:
1) hydrogeological surveys;
2) hydrogeological mapping;
3) the design of bored wells and boreholes;
4) the design of bored wells and boreholes of a ground-source heat pump system;
5) the drilling, alteration and decommissioning of bored wells and boreholes;
6) the drilling, alteration and decommissioning of bored wells and boreholes of a ground-source heat pump system.
§ 209. Object of control of the activity licence for a person carrying out hydrogeological works
(1) An activity licence shall be granted to an undertaking if a natural person acts on its behalf on the basis of a contract who:
1) has at least two years of experience in carrying out the hydrogeological works for which the licence is applied for;
2) whose last practical work experience may be up to five calendar years ago;
3) has the skills and knowledge, including geological knowledge, of the hydrogeological works for which the licence is applied for;
4) is familiar with the requirements of the legal acts regulating hydrogeological works in the field in which they operate;
5) whose previous hydrogeological works in the field for which the activity licence is applied for comply with the requirements of legal acts and the purpose of the work.
(2) In addition to that mentioned in subsection 1, an activity licence shall be granted:
1) for hydrogeological surveys and hydrogeological mapping to an undertaking on whose behalf a natural person with a higher education in geology acts on the basis of a contract;
2) for the design of bored wells and boreholes or bored wells and boreholes of a ground-source heat pump system to an undertaking on whose behalf a natural person with a higher education in geology or environmental technology acts on the basis of a contract;
3) for the drilling or alteration of bored wells and boreholes or bored wells and boreholes of a ground-source heat pump system to an undertaking which has a drilling machine or a bank guarantee for financing the investment in the acquisition of a drilling machine for the establishment of bored wells and boreholes.
(3) A person who has acquired a foreign professional qualification may also act as a person carrying out hydrogeological works if their professional qualification has been recognised in accordance with the Recognition of Foreign Professional Qualifications Act. The competent authority provided for in § 7(2) of the Recognition of Foreign Professional Qualifications Act is the Ministry of the Environment.
§ 210. Ancillary conditions of the activity licence for hydrogeological works
The following ancillary conditions may be added to the activity licence for hydrogeological works:
1) the names of the permitted hydrogeological works, in order to ensure the expert performance of hydrogeological works depending on the field of higher education acquired by the applicant for the activity licence and the experience, skills and knowledge in the field of hydrogeological works;
2) in the establishment or alteration of bored wells and boreholes, a permit to drill only a certain aquifer or only bored wells with a certain production limit, in order to ensure compliance with the requirements for the protection of groundwater depending on the drilling machine and drilling technology in the possession of the applicant for the activity licence.
§ 211. Application for an activity licence for hydrogeological works
In addition to that mentioned in clauses 1–5 of § 19(2) of the General Part of the Economic Activities Code Act, the following data must be submitted for obtaining an activity licence for hydrogeological works:
1) the name, personal identification code, official title, name of the hydrogeological work and contact details of the employee carrying out the hydrogeological works of the legal person;
2) the names of the hydrogeological works for which the activity licence is applied for;
3) written proof of two years of experience in carrying out hydrogeological works and at least three examples of work carried out;
Page 54 / 72
Water Act
4) a diploma certifying higher education in geology if an activity licence is applied for for hydrogeological surveys or hydrogeological mapping;
5) a diploma certifying higher education in geology or environmental technology if an activity licence is applied for for the design of bored wells and boreholes or bored wells and boreholes of a ground-source heat pump system;
6) a copy of the technical passport of the drilling machine used and a description of the drilling technologies used if an activity licence is applied for for the drilling or alteration of bored wells and boreholes or bored wells and boreholes of a ground-source heat pump system.
§ 212. Processing of an application for an activity licence for hydrogeological works
(1) The Ministry of the Environment shall process an application for an activity licence for hydrogeological works.
(2) If the Ministry of the Environment does not process an application within the time limit or the extended time limit established by the General Part of the Economic Activities Code Act, the activity licence is not deemed to have been granted to the undertaking by default upon expiry of that time limit.
§ 213. Derogations for the revocation of an activity licence for hydrogeological works
In addition to that provided for in § 37 of the General Part of the Economic Activities Code Act, the issuer of the activity licence shall revoke the licence if the holder of the licence has violated the requirements for the protection of groundwater and the violation has been accompanied by the over-abstraction or pollution of groundwater or an environmental hazard, or if the holder of the licence has, through their activity, caused damage to a bored well or a borehole or a threat thereof.
Chapter 8
Encumbrance of a Public Water Body with a Structure
Division 1
General Provisions
§ 214. General requirements for the encumbrance of a public water body with a structure
(1) The encumbrance of the bottom of a public water body with a structure which is not part of a riparian immovable is permitted only in the cases, under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure provided for in law.
(2) The owner of a riparian immovable bordering on a public water body has the right to encumber the public water body with a structure permanently connected to the bank and supported by the bottom of the water body extending beyond the boundary of the immovable under the conditions and in accordance with the procedure provided for in law.
Division 2
Fee for the Encumbrance of a Public Water Body
with a Structure Permanently Connected to the Bank
§ 215. Fee for the encumbrance of a public water body with a structure permanently connected to the bank
(1) When encumbering a public water body with a structure permanently connected to the bank, if this is accompanied by a change in the shoreline and an increase in the area of the riparian immovable, the owner of the riparian immovable must pay a one-off fee to the state, the amount of which is half of the assessed value of the newly created land. The basis for calculating the assessed value of the newly created land is the assessed value of the riparian immovable.
(2) When encumbering a public water body with a structure permanently connected to the bank or a part thereof, if this is not accompanied by a change in the shoreline and an increase in the area of the riparian immovable, the owner of the riparian immovable must pay an annual usage fee for the area of the structure or part thereof, the amount of which is four per cent of the calculated assessed value of the part of the public water body encumbered with the structure or part thereof. The conditions and procedure for calculating the assessed value of the riparian immovable shall apply to the calculation of the calculated assessed value.
(3) The fee provided for in subsections 1 and 2 shall not be charged for the construction of the following structures:
1) a temporary structure;
2) a structure with a building area of up to 60 square metres;
3) a floating quay located in a small harbour within the meaning of the Ports Act.
(4) If a public water body is encumbered with such a structure permanently connected to the bank, one part of which is accompanied by a change in the shoreline and an increase in the area of the riparian immovable, but another part is not, the owner of the riparian immovable shall pay the fee provided for in subsection 1 for the part of the structure that increased the area of the riparian immovable and the fee provided for in subsection 2 for the remaining part of the structure.
Water Act
Page 55 / 72
(5) The fee exemption mentioned in clause 2 of subsection 3 includes one structure permanently connected to the bank with a building area of up to 60 square metres, built in a public water body within one riparian immovable.
§ 216. Procedure for the payment of the fee for the encumbrance of a public water body with a structure permanently connected to the bank
(1) The fee provided for in § 215(1) must be paid before the granting of an authorisation for use for the structure. The said fee shall be calculated and a payment notice shall be issued by the Consumer Protection and Technical Regulatory Authority (hereinafter in this Chapter *the competent authority*) after the registration of the change in the boundaries of the immovable in the land register. The deadline for the payment of the fee is three months.
(2) The fee provided for in § 215(2) must be paid on the basis of a payment notice issued by the competent authority by 1 July of the same calendar year. The first payment of the fee must be made by 1 July of the year following the granting of the authorisation for use.
(3) The fee provided for in § 215(2) is calculated from the day following the date of granting the authorisation for use for the structure.
(4) The payment notice for the fees provided for in subsections 1 and 2 of § 215 shall indicate:
1) the given name and surname and official title of the official who prepared the payment notice;
2) the date of preparation of the payment notice;
3) the name and address of the payer;
4) the amount of the fee;
5) the legal and factual basis of the payment notice, including the bases for calculating the fee;
6) the payment deadline;
7) a warning about the application of enforcement in the event of failure to pay the fee by the deadline.
(5) The payment notice referred to in subsection 4 is an administrative act for the performance of a public law financial obligation for the purposes of clause 21 of § 2(1) of the Code of Enforcement Procedure.
(6) The fees provided for in subsections 1 and 2 of § 215 shall be paid into the state budget.
Division 3
Encumbrance of a Public Water Body with a Structure
not Permanently Connected to the Bank
§ 217. Superficies licence
(1) A superficies licence is a right for a specified term to encumber a delineated part of a public water body with a structure permanently connected to its bottom, which is not permanently connected to the bank. A state authority does not need to apply for a superficies licence to encumber a public water body with a structure.
(2) A structure which has been built on the basis of a superficies licence and to which the superficies licence extends is an essential part of the superficies licence and belongs to the holder of the superficies licence on the basis of the right of ownership. All other structures permanently connected to the bottom of a public water body which are not permanently connected to the bank are essential parts of the public water body and belong to the state on the basis of the right of ownership.
(3) A superficies licence does not replace other permits provided for in law which are necessary for the construction and use of a structure that is an essential part of the superficies licence, unless otherwise provided by law.
(4) This division does not apply to the dredging of a public water body and to a navigation aid installed in a public water body.
§ 218. Application for a superficies licence
(1) An application for a superficies licence shall be submitted to the competent authority.
(2) An application for a superficies licence must contain the following data:
1) the purpose of use of the structure;
2) the maximum height and depth of the structure and other essential technical data;
3) the number of structures on the area to be encumbered and the building area;
4) the coordinates of the area of the public water body to be encumbered and the size of the area to be encumbered in square metres;
5) a description of the survey referred to in clause 3 of § 219(7) if the competent authority requires such a survey to be carried out;
6) the requested duration of the superficies licence.
(3) If additional requirements have been established by law for the holder of a superficies licence, the application for a superficies licence must also contain a confirmation by the applicant for the superficies licence that they meet these requirements. Documents proving compliance with the said requirements shall be appended to the application.
Page 56 / 72
Water Act
(4) The application for a superficies licence shall be accompanied by a site plan of the planned structure and the facilities necessary for its servicing, including submarine cables, and other documents of significance from the point of view of the encumbrance of a public water body with a structure. After carrying out the surveys determined by the competent authority and the environmental impact assessment, the applicant for the superficies licence shall submit the survey and environmental impact assessment reports to the competent authority. The applicant for the superficies licence shall re-submit the documents originally appended to the application if they have been specified after the surveys have been carried out and the environmental impact has been assessed.
(5) Derogations for an application for a superficies licence for the encumbrance of a public water body with a wind farm are provided for in the Electricity Market Act.
(6) The form of the application for a superficies licence and the specified requirements for the application and its annexes may be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 219. Initiation of a superficies licence procedure
(1) The competent authority shall decide on the initiation of a superficies licence procedure.
(2) The competent authority shall make a decision on the initiation or non-initiation of a superficies licence procedure after receiving an opinion from the relevant authorities. The authority giving an opinion must justify its opinion. The deadline for giving an opinion is 30 days. If the authority giving an opinion does not submit its opinion within the said time limit, it shall be deemed that it has no objections to the application for a superficies licence.
(3) If there are no circumstances precluding the initiation of a superficies licence procedure, the competent authority shall, before initiating the superficies licence procedure, publish a notice in the Official Gazette, in at least one national daily newspaper and on its website. The notice shall publish the data of the applicant for the superficies licence and the application. The notice provided for in this subsection shall not apply to a structure provided for in § 104(3) of the Building Code.
(4) Within 20 days of the publication of the notice, other interested persons have the right to submit their own application for a superficies licence for the encumbrance of the same part of a public water body with a structure. The application must comply with the requirements provided for in § 218 of this Act. If several applications are submitted for one area of a public water body and the structures with which it is desired to encumber the area of the public water body differ significantly from the structure presented in the first application, the competent authority shall also submit the other applications for an opinion in accordance with the procedure provided for in subsection 2 of this section.
(5) If several applications for a superficies licence have been submitted to the competent authority for one area of a public water body, for which there are no grounds for refusal to grant a superficies licence provided for in § 223 of this Act, the superficies licence procedure shall be initiated on the basis of the application which best corresponds to the social and economic needs of Estonian society as a whole, the strategic development plans of the state and the regional plan. For other applications, the competent authority shall refuse to initiate the procedure, unless, due to the nature of the structure, it is possible to grant another superficies licence for the area concerned.
(6) If the area to be encumbered specified in the application for a superficies licence is amended before the decision on the initiation of the superficies licence procedure is made, the competent authority shall request an opinion from the relevant authorities in accordance with the procedure provided for in subsection 2 of this section. The area to be encumbered specified in the application may be amended with justification after the publication of the notice in the Official Gazette under subsection 3 and the procedure under subsection 5. If the area is amended after the publication of the said notice and the procedure to a greater extent than 33 per cent, the notice under subsection 3 must be published in the Official Gazette and, in the case of submission of competing applications, they must be processed under subsection 5.
(7) Upon initiating a superficies licence procedure, the competent authority shall determine:
1) the person whose application will be processed;
2) the initiation or non-initiation of an environmental impact assessment;
3) where necessary, the surveys which the applicant for the superficies licence must carry out for the decision on the granting of the superficies licence, and the deadline for carrying them out;
4) where necessary, the conditions which must be taken into account if another superficies licence procedure has also been initiated for the application area or if another superficies licence is valid for the encumbrance of the application area;
5) other necessary conditions.
(8) The competent authority may, on the basis of a reasoned application by the applicant for the superficies licence, extend the deadline for carrying out the surveys determined upon the initiation of the superficies licence and amend other conditions.
§ 220. Initiation of a superficies licence procedure by way of a competition
(1) In the initiation of a superficies licence procedure by way of a competition, the provisions of subsections 6–8 of § 219 of this Act shall apply.
(2) If a decision cannot be made between several applications for a superficies licence due to the lack of sufficient considerations, the competent authority shall organise a competition by way of a written auction between the applicants for these applications for the initiation of a superficies licence procedure.
Page 57 / 72
(3) In order to organise a competition for the selection of an application for a superficies licence for the initiation of a superficies licence procedure, the competent authority may set:
1) a starting price for the auction of up to 1,000,000 euros;
2) a participation fee for the competition.
(4) The participation fee for the competition must be equal for the participants in the auction (hereinafter *bidder*) and may not be higher than the starting price of the auction determined in accordance with clause 1 of subsection 3 of this section. After the winner of the auction has been determined and in the event of the failure of the auction, the participation fee shall be refunded. The participation fee paid by the winner of the auction shall be deducted from the sum offered at the auction. If the winner of the auction does not pay the offered sum, the participation fee shall not be refunded.
(5) The competent authority shall not qualify a bidder if they have not paid the participation fee for the competition by the deadline or if the bidder has not submitted the data or documents necessary for participating in the competition.
(6) The competent authority shall reject a bid if the bid does not comply with the requirements.
(7) The competent authority shall declare an auction to have failed if:
1) only one bidder is qualified;
2) only one compliant bid was submitted;
3) no bidder is qualified;
4) no bid or no compliant bid was submitted;
5) there is another reason which affected or could have significantly affected the outcome of the auction.
(8) In the event that an auction is declared to have failed as provided for in clauses 3–5 of subsection 7, the competent authority may, within 30 days of the date of opening the bids, organise a new auction.
(9) The superficies licence procedure shall be initiated with respect to the bidder who offers the highest price at the written auction and pays the offered sum by the deadline specified in the notice of the competition. If the winner of the competition does not pay the offered sum by the deadline or withdraws the application for a superficies licence, the bidder who made the next best bid and pays the offered sum by the deadline set by the competent authority shall be deemed the winner of the auction, and the superficies licence procedure shall be initiated with respect to them. If the auction is declared to have failed for the reason provided for in clause 1 or 2 of subsection 7, the superficies licence procedure shall be initiated with respect to the bidder who was the only one to qualify or the only one to submit a compliant bid.
(10) The procedure and conditions for the competition referred to in subsection 2 shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 221. Refusal to initiate a superficies licence procedure
(1) The competent authority shall refuse to initiate a superficies licence procedure if the granting of a superficies licence is obviously impossible.
(2) The competent authority shall also refuse to initiate a superficies licence procedure if:
1) a procedure for the granting of another superficies licence has already been initiated on the application area, on the basis of which, taking into account the nature of the structure to be built, it is not possible to grant another superficies licence for the area;
2) a plan has been initiated on the application area and the planning procedure has not been completed;
3) the erection of the planned structure requires the preparation of a national designated spatial plan.
(3) Clause 2 of subsection 2 does not apply if the applicant for the superficies licence agrees that the superficies licence will be granted with the period of validity provided for in § 224(4) of this Act.
§ 222. Granting of a superficies licence
(1) The competent authority shall grant a superficies licence.
(2) The following conditions of a superficies licence shall be determined upon the granting of a superficies licence:
1) the holder of the superficies licence;
2) the area of the public water body to be encumbered, including the coordinates and size in square metres of the area covered by the structure;
3) the purpose of use of the structure;
4) the permitted maximum height and depth of the structure and other essential technical data of the structure;
5) the maximum permitted number of structures and the maximum permitted building area;
6) the period of validity of the superficies licence;
7) restrictions on the use of the superficies licence;
8) other necessary conditions.
(3) The area of the public water body to be encumbered consists of the area under the structure and the facilities necessary for its servicing. In the case of a complex of structures built on the basis of one superficies licence, the area to be encumbered is also considered to be the distance of up to 1000 metres between individual structures, which is calculated based on the overall width of the structures.
(4) In the procedure of a superficies licence, the area of the public water body to be encumbered may be shifted or increased by up to 33 per cent compared to the area to be encumbered determined in the decision on the initiation of the superficies licence procedure. The area to be encumbered may be reduced by more than 33 per cent. The area to be encumbered may not be shifted or increased to an area where a procedure for another superficies licence has been initiated.
Page 58 / 72
Water Act
(5) A superficies licence shall be granted to a person who is not a citizen of Estonia or a contracting state of the European Economic Area or a legal person of Estonia or the European Economic Area only on the basis of the important interests of the state.
§ 223. Refusal to grant a superficies licence
(1) The competent authority shall refuse to grant a superficies licence if:
1) the applicant for the superficies licence has not fulfilled the conditions determined in the decision on the initiation of the superficies licence procedure or has not applied for a new deadline for their fulfilment;
2) the conditions of the applied-for superficies licence are in conflict with a valid superficies licence;
3) the conditions of the applied-for superficies licence are in conflict with a valid plan;
4) the conditions of the applied-for superficies licence are in conflict with the national security interests;
5) there is a significant negative environmental impact which cannot be sufficiently avoided or mitigated;
6) the structure that is an essential part of the superficies licence would interfere with air traffic, vessel traffic on a waterway or in a port water area, or the safe mooring of watercraft;
7) the applicant for the superficies licence does not meet the requirements established for the holder of a superficies licence;
8) the area of the public water body to be encumbered applied for needs to be changed as a result of the procedure and the applicant for the superficies licence does not agree to the change of the area to be encumbered.
(2) The competent authority may also refuse to grant a superficies licence if there is doubt about the applicant for the superficies licence that they may endanger public order, public security or national security.
§ 224. Validity of a superficies licence
(1) A superficies licence is valid for 50 years. The competent authority may, taking into account the type and purpose of the structure, establish a shorter period of validity for a superficies licence.
(2) The competent authority may, at the request of the holder of a superficies licence, extend the period of validity of the superficies licence by up to 50 years. An application for the extension of a superficies licence must be submitted at least three months before the expiry of the period of validity of the superficies licence.
(3) The provisions on the amendment of the conditions of a superficies licence shall apply to the extension of the period of validity of a superficies licence.
(4) If a superficies licence procedure is initiated for an area for which a plan has also been initiated and the planning procedure has not been completed, the superficies licence granted on the basis of that licence procedure is valid for one year after the establishment of the plan.
§ 225. Amendment of the conditions of a superficies licence
(1) The competent authority may, at the request of the holder of a superficies licence or on its own initiative, amend the conditions of a superficies licence.
(2) The competent authority may, at the request of the holder of a superficies licence, transfer the superficies licence to another person.
(3) The competent authority shall refuse to amend the conditions or data of a superficies licence if there are grounds for refusal to grant a superficies licence.
(4) The competent authority may amend the conditions of a superficies licence on its own initiative if there are grounds for revoking the superficies licence.
§ 226. Transfer of a superficies licence to a universal successor
(1) If a superficies licence has been transferred to another person by way of universal succession, the competent authority shall amend the data of the holder of the superficies licence at the request of the universal successor or on its own initiative.
(2) Upon the transfer of a superficies licence to a universal successor, the other conditions of the superficies licence shall remain the same.
§ 227. Revocation of a superficies licence
(1) The competent authority may revoke a superficies licence on its own initiative or at the request of the holder of the superficies licence.
(2) The competent authority shall decide on the revocation of a superficies licence after it has issued a precept to the holder of the superficies licence to eliminate the deficiencies, but the holder of the superficies licence has not complied with it. A proposal to eliminate the deficiencies need not be made if its fulfilment is obviously impossible.
(3) The competent authority shall revoke a superficies licence if:
1) the holder of the superficies licence requests it;
Water Act
Page 59 / 72
2) the holder of the superficies licence has significantly violated the conditions of the superficies licence;
3) the holder of the superficies licence has not, within two years of the granting of the superficies licence, submitted an application for a building permit or applied for a new deadline for applying for a building permit;
4) the holder of the superficies licence has not, within two years of the destruction or unsuitability for use of the structure that is an essential part of the superficies licence, submitted an application for a building permit or applied for a new deadline for applying for a building permit;
5) the structure that is an essential part of the superficies licence is dangerous to human life, health or property or to the environment;
6) the holder of the superficies licence is in arrears with the payment of the superficies fee for three consecutive payment deadlines;
7) the holder of the superficies licence no longer meets the requirements established for the holder of a superficies licence.
(4) The competent authority may revoke a superficies licence if:
1) after its granting, the grounds provided for in § 223(2) become apparent;
2) the holder of the superficies licence has knowingly submitted false information which affected the decision on the granting of the superficies licence.
§ 228. Replacement of a superficies licence with a right of superficies
(1) If the part of a public water body encumbered with a superficies licence permanently becomes dry land during the period of validity of the superficies licence, the superficies licence shall lose its validity from the formation of a cadastral unit.
(2) The holder of a superficies licence has the right to demand the establishment of a right of superficies on the created immovable under the same conditions as the superficies licence. The application for the establishment of a right of superficies shall be processed by the competent authority.
§ 229. Removal of a structure from a water body upon the expiry of a superficies licence
The holder of a superficies licence is obliged to remove the structure that is an essential part of the superficies licence from the public water body upon the expiry of the superficies licence, unless otherwise specified in the conditions of the superficies licence.
Division 4
Superficies Fee
§ 230. Superficies fee
(1) When encumbering a public water body with a structure not permanently connected to the bank, the owner of the structure must pay a superficies fee each year. The amount of the superficies fee is four per cent of the price calculated on the basis of the average value of land in Estonia with a intended purpose corresponding to the purpose of use of the structure, which is calculated based on the area of the public water body to be encumbered. The average value of land is found on the basis of the results of the regular assessment of land carried out in accordance with the Land Valuation Act.
(2) The amount of the superficies fee for the encumbrance of a public water body with a wind farm is provided for in the Electricity Market Act.
(3) This division does not apply to the following structures:
1) a depression created by dredging a public water body;
2) a navigation aid installed in a public water body;
3) a sports or recreational facility serving a bathing beach.
§ 231. Procedure for the payment of the superficies fee
(1) The superficies fee is calculated from the day following the date of granting the building permit on the basis of the superficies licence. The superficies fee must be paid until the expiry or revocation of the superficies licence. If the structure is removed from the public water body after the expiry or revocation of the superficies licence, the superficies fee must be paid until the removal of the structure from the public water body. The competent authority shall calculate the superficies fee.
(2) After the granting of the building permit until the start of the intended use of the structure, the superficies fee must be paid at ten per cent of the rate provided for in § 230(1). The superficies fee must be paid at the full rate from the start of the intended use of the structure.
(3) The superficies fee shall be paid in accordance with the procedure provided for in subsections 2 and 4–6 of § 216.
Chapter 9
Making Contributions to the International Fund
for Hazardous and Noxious Substances
§ 232. International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances
The International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances has been established by the International Convention on Liability and Compensation for Damage in Connection with the Carriage of Hazardous and Noxious Substances by Sea, 1996, and its 2010 Protocol (hereinafter *the Convention on hazardous and noxious substances*).
Page 60 / 72
Water Act
§ 233. Submission of data on leviable cargo
(1) Leviable cargo is hazardous and noxious substances transported by sea for the purposes of Article 1(10) of the Convention on hazardous and noxious substances.
(2) The receiver of leviable cargo is a person who has actually received leviable cargo after its transport by sea as a terminal operator, an operator of a storage tank located in a port or terminal, or a warehouse keeper located there.
(3) The receiver of leviable cargo is obliged to submit the following data to the Environmental Inspectorate by 1 February each year:
1) name, registry code and address;
2) the quantity of leviable cargo received in the previous calendar year.
(4) The data mentioned in subsection 3 of this section may be submitted through the electronic maritime information system in accordance with the procedure established on the basis of subsection 6.
(5) The receiver of leviable cargo is obliged to allow a supervisory official to check the accuracy of the data mentioned in subsection 3 and to assist them in every way in the check.
(6) The procedure for the submission of the data mentioned in subsection 3 and the form of the report shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 234. Receipt of leviable cargo
(1) Leviable cargo is deemed to have been received for the performance of the obligation provided for in § 233(3) if it has been:
1) received in a port or terminal facility immediately after its transport by sea from another state or, in the case of cabotage, by a vessel near the coast or from an off-shore terminal, a floating storage unit, an off-shore well or in any other such way;
2) received after its transport from a state which is not a state party to the 2003 Protocol to the International Convention on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1992 (hereinafter *the supplementary protocol*) (hereinafter the *1992 Fund Convention*), and in whose port or terminal facility the leviable cargo was received after its transport by sea;
3) unloaded into a floating storage unit located in a marine area, regardless of whether the storage unit is connected to on-shore facilities by a pipeline or not;
4) transferred from one vessel to another vessel which has transported it to an on-shore facility.
(2) The transport of leviable cargo within one port area is not considered transport by sea for the purposes of clause 1 of subsection 1.
(3) Leviable cargo is not deemed to have been received for the performance of the obligation provided for in § 233(3) if it has been transferred from one vessel to another vessel and such transfer takes place:
1) in a port area or a marine area, except in the case referred to in clause 4 of subsection 1;
2) only using the equipment of the vessels or an on-shore pipeline;
3) between two sea-going vessels or between a sea-going vessel and a vessel used on inland waterways.
(4) A floating storage unit referred to in clause 3 of subsection 1 is also considered to be a vessel which is not suitable for navigation or which is permanently or semi-permanently at anchor.
(5) In the case referred to in clause 4 of subsection 1, if the leviable cargo is loaded into a storage facility before being loaded onto another vessel, it is deemed to have been received as leviable cargo.
§ 235. Making contributions to the International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances
The receiver of leviable cargo is obliged to make contributions to the International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances by the date and in the amount indicated on the invoice issued by the Fund, which is calculated on the basis of the quantities of leviable cargo received during a calendar year, if the receiver has received during a calendar year:
1) more than 150,000 tonnes of leviable oil, as defined in Article 1(3) of the 1992 Fund Convention for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage and Article 1(7) of the supplementary protocol, or more than 20,000 tonnes of products listed in the oil list mentioned in Appendix I to Annex I of MARPOL;
2) more than 20,000 tonnes of gas generated during refining;
3) any quantity of natural gas;
4) more than 20,000 tonnes of other leviable cargo.
Chapter 10
Water Act
Page 61 / 72
Water Study and Drinking Water Study
§ 236. Sampling and analysis
(1) In sampling for a water study, the sampling methods established on the basis of subsection 7 of this section shall be used.
(2) A water study for the purposes of this Act is the sampling and analysis of a sample of water, aquatic life, the bottom sediment of a water body, soil and sewage sludge, and petroleum products and other polluting substances for the purpose of assessing the status of water, determining pollution, applying for a water permit and checking its annexes, monitoring by the holder of a water permit, calculating an environmental charge, and self-monitoring required by a water permit.
(3) Water samples taken for a water study and a drinking water study are analysed by testing laboratories.
(4) A drinking water study is the sampling and analysis of a water sample to determine the health safety of drinking water.
(5) The quality of the analyses carried out during a water study must comply with the requirements established on the basis of subsection 7 of this section.
(6) If, during a water study, an observation of aquatic life, a test fishing for the assessment of the ecological status of a water body or the functioning of a fish pass, or an observation of the hydromorphological characteristics of a water body is carried out, the requirements provided for in this section and in § 237 regarding sampling and analysis do not apply to these operations. In this case, standardised methods and methodologies shall be used or, in their absence, generally recognised methods and methodologies in the field.
(7) The quality requirements for the analyses carried out during surveys of physical-chemical and chemical parameters of water and the sampling methods and reference methods for the analysis of groundwater, surface water, sea water, wastewater and sewage, and sewage sludge (hereinafter also *the field of water study*) shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 237. Requirements for a testing laboratory
(1) A testing laboratory which takes samples during water studies must be accredited in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93 (OJ L 218, 13.08.2008, pp. 30–47) for sampling and analysing indicators in the field of water study mentioned in § 236(7) of this Act.
(2) A testing laboratory which takes samples during water studies and carries out physical-chemical and chemical analyses of water must comply with the requirements for a testing laboratory established on the basis of subsection 4 of this section and must perform proficiency tests of testing laboratories in the field of water study at least once a year.
(3) A testing laboratory participating in a proficiency test shall:
1) follow the sampling methods established on the basis of § 236(7) of this Act when transporting a sample;
2) handle a reference sample as a routine sample;
3) not subcontract a sample for partial or full analysis to another testing laboratory during a proficiency test.
(4) The requirements for a testing laboratory carrying out surveys of physical-chemical and chemical parameters of water and for ensuring the quality of its activities shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
§ 238. Organisation of a proficiency test
(1) A proficiency test of testing laboratories is the comparative analysis of samples of groundwater, surface water, sea water, wastewater and sewage, and sewage sludge and the assessment of the analysis results with the participation of several testing laboratories for the purpose of proving the competence and the accuracy of the results of a testing laboratory.
(2) Proficiency tests of testing laboratories are organised by reference laboratories.
(3) A reference laboratory is selected in each field of water study through a public procurement procedure in accordance with the Public Procurement Act.
(4) A reference laboratory plans proficiency tests with a frequency of one to two times a year.
§ 239. Requirements for a reference laboratory
(1) A testing laboratory applying for the right to act as a reference laboratory must comply with the requirements of the standard EVS-EN ISO/IEC 17043 or another equivalent internationally recognised methodology and must be accredited in the field of water study in which it applies for the status of a reference laboratory.
(2) A testing laboratory must, in the field of water study in which it has obtained the right to act as a reference laboratory:
Page 62 / 72
1) successfully perform international proficiency tests of testing laboratories which are organised in accordance with the requirements of the standard EVS-EN ISO/IEC 17043 or another equivalent internationally recognised methodology;
2) provide methodological guidance to testing laboratories;
3) assess the compliance of the analysis methods used by testing laboratories with the reference methods for analysis established on the basis of § 236(7) of this Act;
4) organise proficiency tests of testing laboratories and assess their results;
5) organise further training.
(3) A reference laboratory shall perform the operations mentioned in subsection 2 of this section on the basis of an order placed by the Ministry of the Environment.
§ 240. Assessment of the result of a proficiency test
(1) The result of a testing laboratory that participated in a proficiency test is assessed on the basis of the standard EVS-EN ISO/IEC 17043 or another equivalent internationally recognised methodology.
(2) Deviating results of testing laboratories that participated in a proficiency test are identified using the methods presented in the standard EVS-ISO 5725-2 or other equivalent internationally recognised methods.
(3) A reference laboratory shall send the results of a proficiency test to the participants of the proficiency test in a final report within one month of the expiry of the deadline set by the reference laboratory for the submission of the results.
(4) If a participant in a proficiency test discovers an error in the final report, they may, within two weeks of receiving the final report, apply for the correction of the results. In the case of a justified application, the results shall be corrected and a corrected final assessment shall be sent to all testing laboratories that participated in the proficiency test within two weeks of the expiry of the deadline for submitting an application for correction.
(5) A reference laboratory must keep the documents related to the organisation of a proficiency test for at least ten years.
§ 241. Costs of a water study
A water study, the need for which arises from the pollution of water or soil, shall be financed by the polluter. If it is not possible to identify the polluter, the study of the pollutant content of water, soil or sewage sludge shall be financed from the state budget.
§ 242. Prohibition of obstructing a water study and environmental monitoring
(1) The owner or possessor of a land plot, a means of transport or a structure may not obstruct access to a sampling point for the purpose of carrying out a water study or environmental monitoring and the taking of samples from a water body, soil, groundwater, a means of transport or a structure, except in the case provided for in subsection 2 of this section.
(2) If the drilling of a borehole is required for taking a water sample, this may be done only with the consent of the owner of the land plot.
§ 243. Requirements for a sampler
(1) If samples are taken during a water study or a drinking water study, the sampler must be certified in the relevant field in accordance with the procedure established on the basis of subsection 5 of this section, must use measuring and sampling equipment suitable for the purpose of the water study or drinking water study, and must follow the appropriate measurement methodology.
(2) In a field where samplers are not certified, the sampler must, when sampling, follow the recognised method of the relevant sampling field and ensure that the traceability of the results obtained is proven.
(3) The certification of a sampler is the assessment of the technical knowledge and experience of a sampler in accordance with the certification procedure established on the basis of subsection 5 of this section.
(4) The certification of a sampler is organised by the Ministry of the Environment in cooperation with the Health Board. A sampler is certified every seven years.
(5) The fields of sampling subject to certification shall be determined and the requirements for a sampler, the training programme, the certification procedure, the form of the certificate of certification and the rules of procedure of the certification committee shall be established by a regulation of the minister responsible for the area.
(6) A person who has acquired a foreign professional qualification may also act as a sampler if their professional qualification has been recognised in accordance with the Recognition of Foreign Professional Qualifications Act. The competent authority provided for in § 7(2) of the Recognition of Foreign Professional Qualifications Act is the Ministry of the Environment.
Chapter 11
Water Act
Page 63 / 72
Marine Scientific Research Permit
§ 244. Marine scientific research and application for a marine scientific research permit
(1) Marine scientific research (hereinafter in this Chapter *research*) for the purposes of this Act is a scientific study of living or non-living natural resources carried out in the territorial sea or exclusive economic zone of the Republic of Estonia to increase knowledge of the marine environment for the purposes of Part XIII of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
(2) A foreign state, a foreign national or legal person or an international organisation which wishes to carry out or commission scientific research in the Estonian marine area shall submit an application for a marine scientific research permit (hereinafter *research permit*) to the Ministry of the Environment. Where necessary, an application for a research permit may be submitted to the Ministry of the Environment through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
(3) An application for a research permit shall be submitted six months before the estimated start of the research project and shall contain the following data:
1) the purpose of the research;
2) the research methods and means to be used, including the names, tonnage, types and classes of vessels, and a description of the scientific equipment and technology;
3) the exact geographical area where the research is intended to be carried out, and the route with coordinates;
4) the estimated date of arrival and final departure of the research vessel or the date of deployment and removal of equipment;
5) the name and contact details of the organisation, institution or person organising the research and of the person responsible for the project;
6) the involvement of Estonian representatives in the project.
§ 245. Procedure for granting a research permit
(1) A research permit is granted by the Ministry of the Environment (hereinafter *the permit issuer*), which, where necessary, coordinates the application for a research permit with the relevant administrative authority.
(2) In coordinating a research permit, the relevant administrative authority shall assess the application for a research permit in its area of competence and, where necessary, make a proposal regarding the requirements and conditions of the research permit.
(3) The permit issuer shall assess the compliance of the research with the requirements provided for in § 244(3) and shall, where necessary, determine additional conditions in the research permit for ensuring compliance with the requirements, including approving the involvement of Estonian representatives in the project.
(4) A research permit may grant permission to use the coastal area necessary for the maintenance and operation of the research equipment and may determine a safety zone of up to 500 metres wide necessary for the use of the research equipment and facilities, the extent of which shall be proposed by the Transport Administration. The said equipment and facilities shall bear the marking of the state where they are registered or of the relevant international organisation, and warning signals agreed upon internationally shall be used there for the safety of navigation, taking into account the rules and standards established by competent international organisations.
(5) The permit issuer shall make a decision on the granting or refusal to grant a research permit within four months of receiving a proper application.
§ 246. Refusal to grant a research permit
(1) The permit issuer shall refuse to grant a research permit if:
1) the research may harm national defence or security interests;
2) the research may harm cultural heritage;
3) the relevant administrative authority does not coordinate the application for a research permit.
(2) The permit issuer may refuse to grant a research permit if the research:
1) involves drilling into the continental shelf, the use of explosives or the introduction of pollutants into the marine environment;
2) may endanger aquatic life, the study or use of living or non-living natural resources;
3) may impede vessel traffic;
4) involves the construction, operation or use of artificial islands, equipment and facilities;
5) contains inaccurate information on the purpose of the research or if the organiser of the scientific research has a previously unfulfilled obligation towards the Estonian state;
6) may damage an object with cultural value.
§ 247. Obligations of the holder of a research permit
The holder of a research permit is obliged to comply with the conditions of the research permit, including:
1) to use the best available technology and to comply with the best environmental practice when carrying out the research;
2) to ensure the right of Estonian representatives to participate or be represented in the scientific research project, in particular to be on board the research vessel or other platform or at another scientific facility, if expedient, and to allow Estonian representatives to participate in the project free of charge;
Page 64 / 72
Water Act
3) to submit preliminary reports as soon as possible and, upon completion of the research, its results and conclusions to the permit issuer;
4) to allow the permit issuer access to all basic data and samples of the research and to provide data that can be copied and samples that can be divided into parts without reducing their scientific value;
5) to provide explanations on the submitted data where necessary;
6) to notify the permit issuer without delay of significant changes in the research project;
7) to remove the facilities and equipment after the completion of the project, unless otherwise agreed.
§ 248. Amendment of a research permit
(1) The permit issuer may, at the request of the holder of a research permit, amend the conditions of a research permit if the data on which the granting of the research permit was based have changed or if the research can be carried out more efficiently under other conditions than those specified in the research permit.
(2) The permit issuer shall refuse to amend the conditions or data of a research permit if there are grounds for refusal to grant a research permit.
(3) The permit issuer may amend the conditions of a research permit on its own initiative if there are grounds for revoking the research permit.
§ 249. Revocation of a research permit
(1) The permit issuer shall revoke a research permit if the research is not in accordance with the research permit application on the basis of which the permit was granted.
(2) The permit issuer may revoke a research permit if the holder of the research permit:
1) violates the obligations provided for in § 247 of this Act or international obligations related to the research;
2) the research permit cannot be amended;
3) violates environmental protection norms;
4) has knowingly submitted false information which affected the decision on the granting of the research permit.
Chapter 12
State Supervision
§ 250. Competence of state supervision
(1) State supervision over compliance with the requirements of this Act and the legal acts established on the basis thereof is exercised by the Environmental Inspectorate, the Health Board, the Veterinary and Food Board, the Environmental Board and a local government unit.
(2) State supervision over compliance with the environmental requirements established in and on the basis of this Act and the requirements for the keeping and use of watercraft established on public and publicly used inland water bodies is exercised by the Environmental Inspectorate, taking into account the exceptions provided for in this Chapter.
(3) State supervision over compliance with the requirements established in § 85(2) and in §§ 87, 90 and 91 is exercised by the Health Board.
(4) State supervision over the health safety of water in accordance with the Food Act is exercised by the Veterinary and Food Board.
(5) State supervision over compliance with the requirements established in § 104(7) may also be exercised by a local government unit in addition to the Environmental Inspectorate.
(6) State supervision over compliance with the requirements provided for in §§ 208–210 is also exercised by the Environmental Board in addition to the Environmental Inspectorate.
(7) State supervision over compliance with the requirement provided for in § 174(8), if a water permit is not required, is exercised by the Environmental Board.
§ 251. Special state supervision measures
A law enforcement agency may, for the performance of state supervision provided for in this Act, apply the special state supervision measures provided for in §§ 30, 31, 32, 45, 49, 50 and 51 of the Law Enforcement Act on the basis of and in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Law Enforcement Act.
Water Act
Page 65 / 72
§ 252. Derogations for state supervision
(1) The Environmental Inspectorate may enter a marked immovable without the presence of the possessor or another entitled person if:
1) it is necessary for identifying or averting a significant threat and the involvement of the said persons would be accompanied by a delay which would endanger the achievement of the objective of the measure;
2) entry into the possession is the only possible way to reach another immovable or a water body.
(2) The Environmental Inspectorate does not have to notify the possessor later of entry into the possession on the basis of clause 2 of subsection 1 if no supervisory or misdemeanour proceedings were carried out in the possession after entry.
(3) A law enforcement agency may be present and move with a vehicle, including an off-road vehicle or a floating craft, on a land or water area where being present and moving is prohibited or restricted by a legal act for the purpose of environmental protection.
§ 253. Use of direct coercion
The Environmental Inspectorate is permitted to use physical force on the basis of and in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Law Enforcement Act.
§ 254. Rate of coercive payment
In the event of failure to comply with a precept, the maximum rate of the coercive payment applied in accordance with the procedure provided for in the Substitutive Enforcement and Coercive Payment Act is 32,000 euros.
Chapter 13
Liability
§ 255. Over-abstraction of water, discharge of wastewater onto frozen or snow-covered soil and pollution of ice cover
(1) For the over-abstraction of water, the discharge of wastewater onto frozen or snow-covered soil or the pollution of ice cover –
a fine of up to 200 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 200,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 256. Causing significant soil erosion, a landslide and excess moisture
(1) For causing significant soil erosion, a landslide or excess moisture preventing the intended use of the land –
a fine of up to 200 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 200,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 257. Use of water and a water body without a water permit and violation of the requirements of a water permit
(1) For the use of water or a water body without a water permit or for the violation of the requirements of a water permit –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 400,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 258. Carrying out an activity with a water environment risk without registration
(1) For carrying out an activity with a water environment risk without registration –
a fine of up to 100 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 100,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 259. Violation of the prohibition of pollution of a water body, groundwater and soil and the requirements established for the limitation of pollution
(1) For the violation of the prohibition of pollution of a water body, groundwater or soil or the requirements established for the limitation of pollution –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
Page 66 / 72
Water Act
a fine of up to 400,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 260. Violation of activity restrictions in a water protection zone, sanitary protection zone, recharge area of a drinking water intake, maintenance area and nitrate vulnerable zone
(1) For the violation of the requirements established in a water protection zone, sanitary protection zone, recharge area of a drinking water intake, maintenance area or nitrate vulnerable zone –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 300,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 261. Violation of the water protection requirements for a sewerage structure and a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel
(1) For the violation of the water protection requirements for a sewerage structure or a storage facility for petroleum products, shale oil, its products or biofuel –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 300,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 262. Violation of the environmental requirements for agricultural activity
(1) For the violation of the environmental requirements for agricultural activity –
a fine of up to 200 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 200,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 263. Carrying out hydrogeological works without an activity licence
(1) For carrying out hydrogeological works without an activity licence –
a fine of up to 200 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 200,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 264. Violation of water traffic requirements
(1) For the violation of water traffic requirements –
a fine of up to 100 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 100,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 265. Failure to report an activity and a situation threatening the environmental status of the marine area
(1) For failure to comply with the obligation to report an activity or a situation threatening the environmental status of the marine area –
a fine of up to 100 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 100,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 266. Violation of the requirements for dumping and dredging of a water body
(1) For the violation of the requirements for dumping or dredging of a water body –
a fine of up to 200 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 200,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 267. Violation of the prohibition of discharging pollutants from a vessel into the sea and the prohibition of storing carbon dioxide in a marine area
(1) For the violation of the prohibition of discharging pollutants from a vessel into the sea or for the prohibited storage of carbon dioxide in a marine area –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
Water Act
Page 67 / 72
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 350,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 268. Violation of the requirements for discharging ballast water into the environment
(1) For the violation of the requirements for discharging ballast water into the environment –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 350,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 269. Failure to submit data on leviable cargo
(1) For failure to submit the data mentioned in § 233(3) to the Environmental Inspectorate –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 350,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 270. Failure to make contributions to the International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances
(1) For failure to make contributions to the International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 350,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 271. Discharge of wastewater into the soil in a sewage collection area with a load of 2000 population equivalents or more
(1) For the discharge of wastewater into the soil in a sewage collection area with a load of 2000 population equivalents or more –
a fine of up to 100 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 100,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 272. Violation of the requirements for sewage collection, treatment, on-site treatment and removal
(1) For the violation of the requirements for sewage collection, treatment, on-site treatment or removal –
a fine of up to 100 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 100,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 273. Violation of the quality and control requirements for drinking water and the requirements for mineral water and bathing water
(1) For the violation of the quality or control requirements for drinking water or the requirements for mineral water or bathing water –
a fine of up to 300 fine units shall be imposed.
(2) For the same act, if committed by a legal person, –
a fine of up to 400,000 euros shall be imposed.
§ 274. Proceedings
(1) The body conducting extra-judicial proceedings in the misdemeanours provided for in §§ 255–272 is the Environmental Inspectorate.
(2) In addition to the Environmental Inspectorate, the body conducting extra-judicial proceedings in the misdemeanours provided for in § 260 related to a sanitary protection zone and a maintenance area and in § 261 related to a sewerage structure and in §§ 256, 264, 271 and 272 may also be a rural municipality or city government.
(3) The body conducting extra-judicial proceedings in the misdemeanours provided for in § 273 is the Health Board.
Chapter 14
Implementing Provisions
Division 1
Page 68 / 72
Water Act
Implementation of the Act
§ 275. Achievement of water protection objectives and updating of the river basin management plan
(1) The objectives provided for in § 32(1) and (4) and § 34(1) and (3) of this Act must be achieved by 22 December 2021, except in the cases of derogations provided for in this Act.
(2) Good environmental status of the marine area must be maintained or achieved by 2020, except in the cases of derogations provided for in this Act.
(3) The river basin management plan shall be reviewed and updated by 22 December 2021.
§ 276. Updating the flood risk assessment report, the maps of flood hazard areas and flood risk areas, and the risk management plan
(1) The maps of the flood hazard area and the flood risk area shall be reviewed and, where necessary, updated by 22 December 2019.
(2) The management plan shall be reviewed and, where necessary, updated by 22 December 2021.
§ 277. Determination of the extent of the sanitary protection zone and maintenance area of bored wells and boreholes
(1) For bored wells and boreholes established before the entry into force of this Act, the extent of the sanitary protection zone and maintenance area determined in the legal acts in force at the time of the establishment of the bored well and borehole shall remain in force.
(2) If the sanitary protection zone of a groundwater intake is to be changed to a maintenance area in the relevant register, taking into account § 148(2) of this Act, an application shall be submitted to the Environmental Agency, which shall make an entry on the change of the sanitary protection zone to a maintenance area.
(3) To reduce the extent of a sanitary protection zone, taking into account clauses 1 and 2 of § 149(1) of this Act, an application shall be submitted to the Environmental Board, which shall make a decision on the reduction of the extent of the sanitary protection zone.
(4) The consent of the owner of the water intake is required for changing the sanitary protection zone of a public water supply groundwater intake to a maintenance area or for reducing its extent.
§ 278. Agricultural activity
(1) Until 31 December 2020, manure must be incorporated into the soil in a field without growing crops within 48 hours of the completion of spreading.
(2) Until 31 December 2020, in the case referred to in § 161(2) of this Act, such an amount of nitrogen may be applied with manure as is necessary to obtain a yield of six tonnes per hectare.
(3) Until 31 December 2022, all livestock buildings where more than ten livestock units are kept must have a manure storage facility or a manure and liquid manure storage facility, depending on the type of manure.
(4) Until 31 December 2022, the manure generated may be temporarily stored near the livestock building on an area with a waterproof base and protected from rainwater before spreading or moving to a clamp if ten or fewer livestock units are kept in the livestock building and solid manure or deep-litter manure is generated there.
(5) Until the information system mentioned in § 165(3) and § 166(4) of this Act is completed, the Environmental Board shall be notified of the formation of a clamp in writing.
§ 279. Obligation to have a special water use permit or water permit and activity with a water environment risk and obligation to have an activity licence for hydrogeological works
(1) Special water use permits and activity licences for hydrogeological works granted on the basis of the Water Act before the entry into force of this Act shall remain in force until their expiry, amendment or revocation.
(2) In the case of a special water use permit for a specified term granted on the basis of the version of the Water Act in force until 31 December 2013, the term may not be changed, except for the extension of an existing special water use permit on the basis of a reasoned application until a decision is made on the granting of a new water permit.
(3) If a person has a special water use permit for an activity for which a water permit is not required from the entry into force of this Act, but which is subject to a registration obligation, they may submit an application to the Environmental Board for the revocation of the special water use permit and the registration of the activity.
Water Act
Page 69 / 72
(4) If a person has a special water use permit for an activity for which a water permit is not required from the entry into force of this Act and which is not subject to a registration obligation, they may submit an application to the Environmental Board for the revocation of the special water use permit within three months. In such a case, the Environmental Board shall revoke the special water use permit retroactively from the entry into force of this Act.
(5) If a person has been granted a special water use permit for an activity referred to in clauses 8 and 11 of § 187 of this Act before the entry into force of this Act, they may, within one month of the entry into force of this Act, submit applications for the revocation of the special water use permit and the registration of the activity. In such a case, the Environmental Board shall, upon making the registration, revoke the special water use permit retroactively from the entry into force of this Act.
(6) An activity with a water environment risk must be registered within six months of the entry into force of this Act.
(7) If a person does not have a special water use permit before the entry into force of this Act, but a water permit obligation arises upon the entry into force of this Act, they must apply for a water permit within six months of the entry into force of this Act.
(8) Applications for a special water use permit taken into proceedings before the entry into force of this Act shall be processed further on the basis of the procedural rules in force at the time the application was taken into proceedings.
(9) In the processing of an application for a special water use permit taken into proceedings before the entry into force of this Act, § 17(1) of the Water Act in force before the entry into force of this Act shall not be applied, but this Act shall be applied.
(10) A person shall submit an application to the permit issuer to bring a special water use permit into conformity with § 125(4) of this Act. The amendment to the special water use permit or the new water permit shall enter into force from the date of the decision of the permit issuer.
§ 280. Administrative acts and administrative contracts
(1) Administrative acts confirming groundwater reserves granted before the entry into force of this Act shall remain in force until the expiry of the term specified in the administrative act confirming the reserve or until the revocation of the administrative act.
(2) Administrative contracts concluded on the basis of the Water Act before the entry into force of this Act shall remain in force until their expiry, the performance of the obligation or the termination of the contract.
§ 281. Making contributions to the International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances
The contributions provided for in § 235 of this Act shall be made until the establishment of the International Fund for Hazardous and Noxious Substances in accordance with the procedure provided for in § 35⁴ of the Water Act in force before 1 October 2019.
§ 282. Non-application of the fee for the encumbrance of a public water body with a structure permanently connected to the bank and the superficies fee
(1) Division 2 of Chapter 8 of this Act does not apply to the following structures permanently connected to the bank, built in a public water body:
a structure built on a legal basis for the purposes of the Law of Property Act Implementation Act;
a structure that received a building permit before 1 July 2009.
(2) Division 4 of Chapter 8 of this Act does not apply to a structure not permanently connected to the bank, built in a public water body before 1 January 2010, and to a submarine cable built on the basis of a consent for encumbrance with a submarine cable granted before 1 July 2015.
§ 283. Structure not permanently connected to the bank built in a public water body before 1 January 2010
(1) For a structure not permanently connected to the bank, built in a public water body before 1 January 2010, a superficies licence must be applied for by 31 December 2019.
(2) The application for a superficies licence must contain the data mentioned in clauses 1–4 and 6 of § 218(2) and in subsection 3, and the application shall be accompanied by a site plan of the structure. The application shall be submitted to the body processing the superficies licence. The provisions on the initiation of the superficies licence procedure in this Act, except for § 219(2), do not apply to the processing of the application.
(3) The Consumer Protection and Technical Regulatory Authority shall check the compliance of the structure with the established requirements and, where necessary, issue a precept to the applicant for the superficies licence to eliminate the deficiencies related to the structure.
(4) The Consumer Protection and Technical Regulatory Authority shall refuse to grant a superficies licence on the grounds provided for in § 221 and if the applicant for the superficies licence does not bring the structure into conformity with the established requirements by the deadline specified in the precept. In the event of refusal to grant a superficies licence, clause 1 of § 131(3) of the Building Code shall apply to the structure.
§ 284. Consent for the encumbrance with a submarine cable granted before 1 July 2015
(1) To replace a consent for the encumbrance with a submarine cable granted before 1 July 2015 with a superficies licence, a superficies licence must be applied for by 31 December 2019.
Page 70 / 72
Water Act
(2) The application for a superficies licence must contain the data mentioned in clauses 1–4 and 6 of § 218(2) and in subsection 3, and the application shall be accompanied by a site plan of the structure. The provisions on the initiation of the superficies licence procedure in this Act do not apply to the processing of the application.
(3) The Consumer Protection and Technical Regulatory Authority shall grant a superficies licence on the same conditions as the consent for the encumbrance with a submarine cable, taking into account the conditions for the content of a superficies licence provided for in § 222(2) of this Act. A superficies licence shall be granted with a period of validity of 50 years, unless the applicant for the superficies licence applies for a different duration.
(4) A consent for the encumbrance with a submarine cable granted before 1 July 2015 shall remain in force until the granting of a superficies licence.
Division 2
Amendment and repeal of Acts
§ 285.-§ 304.[Omitted from this text.]
Division 3
Entry into force of the Act
§ 305. Entry into force of the Act
(1) This Act enters into force on 1 October 2019.
(2) Clause 3 of § 301 and § 303 of this Act enter into force in the general procedure.
(3) Clauses 8, 9 and 11 of § 290 of this Act enter into force on 1 July 2019.
(4) Subsections 5 and 6 of § 159, subsection 3 of § 161 and clause 2 of § 294 of this Act enter into force on 1 January 2021.
(5) Subsections 1 and 6 of § 164 of this Act enter into force on 1 January 2023.
¹Council Directive 86/278/EEC on the protection of the environment, and in particular of the soil, when sewage sludge is used in agriculture (OJ L 181, 04.07.1986, pp. 6–12);
Council Directive 91/271/EEC concerning urban waste-water treatment (OJ L 135, 30.05.1991, pp. 40–52);
Council Directive 91/676/EEC concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources (OJ L 375, 31.12.1991, pp. 1–8);
Council Directive 98/83/EC on the quality of water intended for human consumption (OJ L 330, 05.12.1998, pp. 32–54);
Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, pp. 1–73), as amended by Decision No 2455/2001/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 331, 15.12.2001, pp. 1–5), Directive 2008/32/EC (OJ L 81, 20.03.2008, pp. 60–61), Directive 2008/105/EC (OJ L 348, 24.12.2008, pp. 84–97), Directive 2009/31/EC (OJ L 140, 05.06.2009, pp. 114–135), Directive 2013/39/EU (OJ L 226, 24.08.2013, pp. 1–17), Directive 2013/64/EU (OJ L 353, 28.12.2013, pp. 8–12) and Directive 2014/101/EU (OJ L 311, 31.10.2014, pp. 32–35);
Directive 2003/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council providing for public participation in respect of the drawing up of certain plans and programmes relating to the environment and amending with regard to public participation and access to justice Council Directives 85/337/EEC and 96/61/EC (OJ L 156, 25.06.2003, pp. 17–25);
Directive 2005/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on ship-source pollution and on the introduction of penalties for infringements (OJ L 255, 30.09.2005, pp. 11–21), as amended by Directive 2009/123/EC (OJ L 280, 27.10.2009, pp. 52–55);
Directive 2006/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the management of bathing water quality and repealing Directive 76/160/EEC (OJ L 64, 04.03.2006, pp. 37–51);
Directive 2006/118/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of groundwater against pollution and deterioration (OJ L 372, 27.12.2006, pp. 19–31), as amended by Directive 2014/80/EU (OJ L 182, 21.06.2014, pp. 52–55);
Directive 2007/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the assessment and management of flood risks (OJ L 288, 06.11.2007, pp. 27–34);
Directive 2008/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy, amending and subsequently repealing Council Directives 82/176/EEC, 83/513/EEC, 84/156/EEC, 84/491/EEC, 86/280/EEC and amending Directive 2000/60/EC (OJ L 348, 24.12.2008, pp. 84–97), as amended by Directive 2013/39/EU (OJ L 226, 24.08.2013, pp. 1–17);
Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for community action in the field of marine environmental policy (Marine Strategy Framework Directive) (OJ L 164, 25.06.2008, pp. 19–40), as amended by Directive (EU) 2017/845 (OJ L 125, 18.05.2017, pp. 27–33);
Water Act
Page 71 / 72
Commission Directive 2009/90/EC laying down, pursuant to Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, technical specifications for chemical analysis and monitoring of water status (OJ L 201, 01.08.2009, pp. 36–38);
Directive 2009/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the geological storage of carbon dioxide and amending Council Directive 85/337/EEC, Directives 2000/60/EC, 2001/80/EC, 2004/35/EC, 2006/12/EC, 2008/1/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 (OJ L 140, 05.06.2009, pp. 114–135);
Directive 2009/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters (OJ L 164, 26.06.2009, pp. 45–58).
Page 72 / 72
Water Act