

--- PAGE 1 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
1 
 
WATER ACT, 2003 
Date of assent: 5th March, 2003 
Date of commencement: 1st July, 2003 
Arrangement of Sections 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
 1. 
Short title. 
 2. 
Interpretation. 
PART II 
NATIONAL WATER AUTHORITY 
 3. 
Establishment of the National Water Authority. 
 4. 
Constitution of the Authority. 
 5. 
Period of office and remuneration of members of the Authority. 
 6. 
Chairperson, and vice chairperson. 
 7. 
Disqualification, termination of membership and filling of vacancies. 
 8. 
Functions of the Authority. 
 9. 
Designation of flood risk areas. 
 10. 
Water Resources Master Plan. 
 11. 
Powers of the Authority. 
 12. 
Meetings of the Authority. 
 13. 
Quorum and chairperson’s casting vote. 
 14. 
Committees of the Authority. 
 15. 
Budget and reports. 
 16. 
By-laws. 
 17. 
Director. 
 18. 
Department of Water Affairs. 
PART III 
INTERNATIONAL WATER BODIES 
 19. 
International Water Bodies. 
PART IV 
WATER APPORTIONMENT BOARD 
 20. 
Establishment of the Water Apportionment Board. 
 21. 
Constitution of the Board. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
 
 
 
2 
 
 22. 
Chairperson and vice chairperson. 
 23. 
Disqualification, termination of membership and filling of vacancies. 
 24. 
Meetings of the Board. 
 25. 
Quorum, decision and chairperson’s casting vote. 
 26. 
Committees of the Board. 
 27. 
Administrative and other work of the Board. 
 28. 
Powers of the Board. 
 29. 
Establishment and keeping of registers. 
 30. 
Inquiries by the Board and hearing of applications for servitudes. 
 31. 
Annual reports. 
 32. 
Appeals from decisions of the Board or Authority. 
 33. 
River Basin Authorities. 
PART V 
PERMIT FOR THE USE OF WATER 
 34. 
The right in water. 
 35. 
Application for a permit. 
 36. 
Objections to application. 
 37. 
Powers of the Board with respect to an application. 
 38. 
Emergencies. 
 39. 
Drought conditions. 
 40. 
Change in flows. 
 41. 
Cancellation. 
 42. 
Compensation in the event of cancellation. 
 43. 
Transfer of permit. 
 44. 
Duties of the permit holder. 
 45. 
Watercourse used for Eswatini law and custom. 
PART VI 
GROUND WATER 
 46. 
Borehole drilling permit. 
 47. 
Completion or abandonment of borehole drilling. 
 48. 
Permit for ground water abstraction. 
 49. 
Abandonment of a borehole. 
 50. 
Abstraction permit for existing borehole or well. 
 51. 
Interdependency of the permits. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
3 
 
PART VII 
SERVITUDE 
 52. 
Exclusion for Eswatini Nation Land. 
 53. 
Acquisition of servitude. 
 54. 
Power of entry upon land and mode of acquiring servitude. 
 55. 
Rights conferred by servitude. 
 56. 
Use by servient proprietor. 
 57. 
Crossing roads, etc. 
 58. 
Application for servitude. 
 59. 
Claims of misuse. 
 60. 
Person acquiring servitude to construct access bridges, etc. 
 61. 
Servitude over Eswatini Nation Land. 
PART VIII 
CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
 62. 
Effluent control permit. 
 63. 
Interdependence with a permit. 
 64. 
Application for an effluent control permit. 
 65. 
Power of the Board on effluent control. 
 66. 
Cancellation of an effluent control permit. 
 67. 
Suspension of an effluent control permit. 
 68. 
Special powers of the Minister. 
 69. 
Transfer of effluent control permit. 
 70. 
Exemptions under repealed Act. 
PART IX 
WATER SPORT CONTROL ACCESS 
 71. 
Establishment of water sport control areas. 
 72. 
Regulations in respect of water sport control areas. 
PART X 
IRRIGATION DISTRICTS AND WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS 
 73. 
Establishment of Irrigation Districts. 
 74. 
Irrigation District to be a body corporate. 
 75. 
Functions of an Irrigation District. 
 76. 
Water Users Association. 
 77. 
Delegation of powers by the Board. 
 78 
Costs of Water Users Association. 


--- PAGE 4 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.1-2 
 
 
4 
 
PART XI 
PROJECT BOARDS 
 79. 
Establishment of project boards. 
PART XII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 80. 
Special provisions relating to the Great Usuthu (Lusutfu) and Little Usuthu 
(Lusushwana) Rivers. 
 81. 
Alteration of watercourse. 
 82. 
Re-establishing original channel. 
 83. 
Temporary permit. 
 84. 
Recording of permits on title deed land. 
 85. 
Collection of fees and charges. 
 86. 
Powers of inspectors. 
 87. 
Liability for damage. 
 88. 
Right of entry into land. 
 89. 
Service of notices and documents. 
 90. 
Offences and penalties. 
 91. 
Award or damages in criminal proceedings. 
 92. 
Evidence. 
 93. 
Transitional provisions. 
 94. 
Power to make Regulations. 
 95. 
Repeal. 
An Act to replace the Water Act, 1967, and to provide for matters incidental thereto. 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title. 
1. 
This Act may be cited as the Water Act, 2003. 
Interpretation. 
2. 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise provides — 
“aquatic environment” means the components of the earth related to, living in or 
located in or the beds of the shores of a body of water, including but not lim-
ited to — 
 
(a) all organic or inorganic substances; 
 
(b) living organisms and their habitats including fish; 
 
(c) habitats and their interacting natural system; 


--- PAGE 5 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
s.2 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
5 
 
“Authority” means the National Water Authority established by section 3 of this 
Act; 
“basin” means the area drained by the watershed of the five (5) major rivers, 
namely: 1. Komati; 2. Lomati (Mlumati); 3. Usuthu (Lusutfa); 4. Umbeluzi 
(Imbuluzi); and 5. Ngwavuma; 
“Board” means — 
 
(a) the Water Apportionment Board established in terms of section 20; 
or 
 
(b) after a River Basin Authority has been established, that River Basin 
Authority; 
“borehole” means a hole dug or drilled into the ground for the purpose of with-
drawing water from underneath the surface of the earth; 
“dam” means an artificial obstruction in a watercourse built to store or divert  
water flowing in that watercourse; 
“Director” means the Head of the Department of Water Affairs; 
“divert” means to take water from a watercourse and includes to cause water to 
leave the channel of a watercourse and to make a change in or about a chan-
nel that permits all or some of the water to leave the existing channel; 
“effluent” means a waste in liquid form or in suspension in a liquid or in emulsion; 
“effluent control permit” means a permit issued by the Board in terms of section 
62 of the Act; 
“groundwater” means water below the surface of the ground which does not flow 
in a known or defined channel; 
“industrial use” means — 
 
(a) the use of water by an individual or corporation for any industrial, 
commercial, manufacturing, mining or processing purpose; 
 
(b) any other use which will or may alter the chemical, physical or bio-
logical quality of the water or surrounding ecosystem; 
“inspector” means a person designated by the Director as inspector; 
“Irrigation District” means a body incorporated under section 73; 
“JWC” means the Joint Water Commission; 
“local authority” means a town council or town board, city council, district coun-
cil, chief’s council or other local institution of a similar nature which is con-
stituted in accordance with any law and which has the legal power required to 
safeguard the health of the inhabitants of the area under its jurisdiction, and to 
supply water to the inhabitants of the area under its jurisdiction and includes 
the Rural Water Supply Branch and the Eswatini Water Services Corporation; 


--- PAGE 6 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
s.2 
 
 
6 
 
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Water Affairs; 
“permit” means a permit issued by the Board under this Act; 
“person” includes an individual or group of individuals, a partnership, association, 
a body incorporated by or under a statute and an unincorporated board or 
commission established by or under the provisions of a statute; 
“Plan” means the Water Resources Master Plan referred to in section 10; 
“pollution” means the presence in the environment of substances or contaminants, 
or change in the physical or chemical or biological parameters which substan-
tially alter or impair the usefulness of the environment or are harmful to  
human or other living things; 
“proprietor” means — 
 
(a) any person who is registered in the Deeds Office as the owner or 
holder of a concession conveying a land right; 
 
(b) any person who is registered in the Deeds Office as the holder of any 
lease or other document by virtue of which a person referred to in 
paragraph (a) has disposed of any concession mentioned in that par-
agraph, either in whole or in part; 
 
(c) any person who is the owner or holder of a land right; 
 
(d) the liquidator of a company which is a proprietor or the legal repre-
sentative of any person referred to in paragraph (a) or (b); 
 
(e) a legal representative of a person who has died or is a minor or is of 
unsound mind; 
“repealed Act” means the Water Act, 1967; 
“River Basin Authority” means an authority established by the Minister under sec-
tion 33; 
“servitude” means a right owned by a permit holder to occupy and use such part 
of the land belonging to another person for such purposes in connection with 
the enjoyment of the rights under the permit as the agreement or authority 
granting the servitude may describe or this Act may imply; 
“task three” means a group of persons convened by the Authority to investigate or 
advise the Authority on any specific matter or matters related to the develop-
ment or use of water resources; 
“TPTC” means the Tripartite Permanent Technical Committee; 
“use for primary purpose” means the use of water for domestic requirements, sani-
tation, the watering of animals not exceeding 30 head of cattle or the irriga-
tion of land not exceeding one-quarter hectare adjoining or occupied with a 
homestead of not more than 10 persons but does not include the use of water 
by a local authority for distribution to the inhabitants of the area; 


--- PAGE 7 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.2-4 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
7 
 
“watercourse” means a natural or artificial water channel or sources of water sup-
ply, whether artificially improved or altered or not, and whether usually con-
taining water or not, and includes a lake, pond, river, stream, spring, or water 
flowing in a known or defined channel underground, but does not include 
groundwater; 
“water sport” means an area which or part of which is from time to time a control 
area likely to be submerged by water whether naturally or artificially, and 
where such water is or would be suitable for the practice of any water sport 
by the public and to which the public has a right of access; 
“work” means anything capable of or used in connection with diverting, storing, 
measuring, conserving, conveying, retarding, confining, or using water or 
with collecting, conveying, measuring, treating or disposing of sewage or liquid 
wastes, and includes access roads to any of them, and includes the removal of 
obstructions from the banks or beds of a watercourse. 
PART II 
NATIONAL WATER AUTHORITY 
Establishment of the National Water Authority. 
3. 
There is hereby established an Authority known as the National Water Authority, 
which is a body corporate capable of suing and being sued in its corporate name, and with the 
full power and authority to do all things which may be required or which reasonably appear to 
be required for or incidental to the carrying out of its objects and the performance of its duties 
and obligations. 
Constitution of the Authority. 
4. 
(1) Subject to subsection (7), the Authority shall consist of up to fifteen members to 
be appointed by the Minister in accordance with subsections (2), (3), (4) and (5), within sixty 
(60) days of the coming into force of this Act. 
(2) Four members shall be persons who hold office as senior officials of the Govern-
ment from each of the following ministries: 
 
(a) the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives; 
 
(b) the Ministry of Economic Planning and Development; 
 
(c) the Ministry of Natural Resources, and Energy; 
 
(d) the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare. 
(3) There shall at all times be three (3) members appointed by the Minister nominated 
by each of the following: 
 
(a) Eswatini Sugar Association; 
 
(b) Eswatini Citrus Board; and 
 
(c) Eswatini Chamber of Commerce and Industry. 
(4) The Minister shall appoint three members who — 
 
(a) shall represent associations, co-operatives and individuals on Eswatini Nation 
Land; and 


--- PAGE 8 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.4-7 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) shall be familiar with at least one of the five major river basins in the country 
and the major crops grown on Eswatini Nation Land. 
(5) There shall at all times be one member from each established River Basin Authority 
nominated by their respective Basin Authorities as contemplated in section 33. 
(6) The six members appointed in terms of subsections (3) and (4) will cease to be 
members after a period of five years from the establishment of the Authority. 
(7) After a period of five years from its establishment, the Authority shall consist of 
nine members, four of whom shall be appointed in the manner provided for in subsection (2) 
and five of whom shall be appointed in the manner provided in subsection (5). 
(8) The Minister may appoint as an alternate to any member a person possessing the 
like qualifications for appointment as that appointed member. 
(9) An alternate is entitled to attend any meeting of the Authority but is not entitled to 
vote unless the member for whom the alternate is appointed is absent. 
(10) A person shall not be a member or an alternate member of both the Authority and 
the Board at the same time and a person who being a member of the Board is appointed as a 
member or alternate member of the Authority shall forthwith cease to be a member or alter-
nate member of the Board. 
(11) The Secretary of the Authority shall be the Director in terms of section 17. 
Period of office and remuneration of members of the Authority. 
5. 
(1) A member of the Authority other than a member referred to in section 4(2) shall 
be appointed for a period of three years, and any person whose period of office as a member 
of the Authority has expired shall be eligible for reappointment. 
(2) The members of the Authority referred to in section 4(2), (3) and (4) and their  
alternates shall hold office upon such conditions (including payment of sitting allowance) as 
the Minister may, in consultation with the Minister of Finance, determine. 
(3) Any allowances which are payable under subsection (2) shall be paid out of the 
Consolidated Fund. 
Chairperson, and vice chairperson. 
6. 
(1) The Minister shall designate one member as chairperson and another member as 
vice chairperson of the Authority and, if the chairperson or the vice chairperson or the secre-
tary ceases to hold office as a member of the Authority, the Minister shall designate other 
members as new chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary. 
(2) If at any meeting of the Authority the chairperson and the vice chairperson are  
absent for any reason and are unable to preside, the members present shall nominate an acting 
chairperson. 
Disqualification, termination of membership and filling of vacancies. 
7. 
(1) A person shall not be appointed as a member or alternate member of the Authority 
if that person — 
 
(a) is an unrehabihitated insolvent; or 
 
(b) has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment without the 
option of a fine. 


--- PAGE 9 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.7-8 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
9 
 
(2) The Minister may remove from office any member of the Authority who has been 
selected or appointed under section 4 who — 
 
(a) has failed to comply with a condition of the appointment; 
 
(b) in the opinion of the Minister, has been guilty of improper conduct or has 
habitually neglected his duties as a member of the Authority; or 
 
(c) has, without written permission of the chairperson of the Authority, been  
absent from three consecutive meetings of the Authority. 
(3) If any member of the Authority ceases to hold office, the Minister shall, subject to 
sections 4 and 6, appoint a person to fill the vacancy on the Authority. 
(4) The alternate to a member who has ceased to be a member shall continue to have 
the authority and rights of an alternate until the appointment as an alternate expires or is ter-
minated. 
Functions of the Authority. 
8. 
With the approval of the Minister, the functions of the Authority are to — 
 
(a) prepare, adopt, and subsequently update, the Water Resources Master Plan 
which shall comply with section 10; 
 
(b) advise the Minister on the appointments of persons to serve in the Joint Water 
Commission or any other international or national water commission which 
may be established pursuant to section 19 of this Act; 
 
(c) advise the Minister on the promulgation of regulations respecting the setting 
of fees or charges for covering operation, cost and maintenance of government 
works, application fees, fees for appeals or charges for use of water; 
 
(d) oversee the work of and provide policy criteria and direction to the Board and 
to Project Boards, River Basin Authorities and task forces and to approve 
their budgets before they are submitted to the Minister; 
 
(e) advise the Minister on policy directions relating water affairs; 
 
(f) co-ordinate the work of different boards, water sector agencies and interna-
tional water commissions; 
 
(g) recommend policy with respect to the issue, renewal, amendment or cancella-
tion of permits; 
 
(h) hear appeals from the Board, as provided in section 32; 
 
(i) monitor and recommend policy direction and guidelines to the Eswatini 
members of the Tripartite Permanent Technical Committee and the Joint  
Water Commission and any other international water commission; 
 
(j) review and consider recommendations from the Tripartite Permanent Tech-
nical Committee, the Joint Water Commission and any international water 
commission and to make recommendations thereon to the Minister; 
 
(k) determine the proper management of works and ensure that periodic safety 
inspections are made of all works; 
 
(l) consider, approve, amend or reject development proposals for the develop-
ment of water resources which may have a significant impact on the use of 
water resources; 


--- PAGE 10 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.8-10 
 
 
10 
 
 
(m) recommend to the Minister the adoption of water quality objectives; 
 
(n) recommend to the Minister time limits for renewal of permits; 
 
(o) cause to be maintained, expanded and continued, the collection of hydrologi-
cal, meteorological or other water related data and to arrange for the collect-
ing and making available to the Authority, to the Board and to the public of 
all such data as may be obtained; and 
 
(p) do such other things as the Minister may in writing assign to the Authority. 
Designation of flood risk areas. 
9. 
(1) If the Authority is of the opinion that there is or may be a risk to human life or 
property as a result of flooding, the Authority shall recommend to the Minister to — 
 
(a) designate any area of land as a flood risk area, either generally or on an interim 
basis; and 
 
(b) specify any acceptable uses with respect to the flood risk area. 
(2) Before recommending the designation of flood risk areas, the Authority shall take 
measures to consult with local land owners and occupants and local authorities. 
Water Resources Master Plan. 
10. 
(1) There shall be a Plan prepared, and adopted by the National Water Authority after 
the approval of the Minister. 
(2) The Plan shall contain an inventory of the total water resources of Eswatini and a 
comprehensive programme of action in which the maximum value can be obtained from this 
resource for the benefit of the people of Eswatini. 
(3) The Plan shall include the generally accepted principles of river basin management. 
(4) The Plan shall — 
 
(a) be based on all relevant data including but not limited to data of surface water 
flows, ground water flows, biological state, climatic conditions, agricultural 
land suitability, forestry and industrial potential; 
 
(b) identify, at a prefeasibility level, opportunities for water resources develop-
ment including both storage reservoirs and runoff, the river developments for 
irrigated agriculture, hydroelectric generation and industrial use; 
 
(c) consider potential requirements for domestic consumption, schools clinics 
and similar institutions. 
(5) The Plan shall specifically take into consideration potential developments in the 
neighbouring countries as well as in the Southern African Development Community. 
(6) The objective of the Plan is — 
 
(a) to define criteria for allocation of water; 
 
(b) to secure sufficient water resources for domestic, agricultural and industrial 
needs; 
 
(c) to determine beneficial and equitable needs within the context of sharing  
waters of international river basins; 
 
(d) to protect the aquatic environment; 


--- PAGE 11 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.10-12 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
11 
 
 
(e) to set down social and economic criteria for evaluating alternative water  
resources developments; 
 
(f) to set down provisions for integrating water management with land and other 
resources; 
 
(g) to develop a water pricing policy based on the economic value of water; 
 
(h) to develop water conservation objectives including water quality objectives. 
(7) The Authority shall in a form and manner prepared by the Authority and approved 
by the Minister, consult with the public during the development of the framework for the Plan. 
(8) The Authority shall develop and adopt the Plan in stages and shall prepare for the 
approval of the Minister a schedule and timetable for the proposed development of the Plan. 
(9) A final Plan shall consist of — 
 
(a) a summary of the issues considered in the plan; 
 
(b) a summary of recommendations and policies that must be considered in issuing 
permits, assessing development of options, integrating water and other resources, 
conserving the aquatic environment, upholding international obligations. 
(10) There shall be a periodic review of the Plan every three years. 
Power of the Authority. 
11. 
(1) The Authority shall have all the powers necessary or which reasonably appear to 
be necessary to achieve its objects and to perform its duties. 
(2) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), the Authority shall have power — 
 
(a) to recommend to the Minister the incorporation of Irrigation Districts; 
 
(b) to recommend to the Minister the incorporation of Project Boards and River 
Basin Authorities; 
 
(c) to declare emergencies in respect of water resources either in general or in 
specified areas, after consultation with the Minister; 
 
(d) to determine the amount of compensation to be granted when the Board has 
recommended compensation under sections 42 and 59; 
 
(e) to delegate any authority to inspectors or other persons for the purposes of 
implementing this Act; 
 
(f) to establish task forces as required; 
 
(g) to engage consultants and advisers to provide technical support where required. 
Meetings of the Authority. 
12. 
(1) The first meeting of the Authority shall be held at a time and place to be deter-
mined by the Minister but no later than four months after the coming into force of the Act, and 
all subsequent meetings shall beheld at such times and places as may be determined by the 
Authority or, if at the close of any meeting the Authority has not determined the time and 
place for its next meeting, by the chairperson of the Authority. 
(2) The chairperson of the Authority shall, when directed thereto by the Minister, or 
on the written demand of not less than eight members, call a special meeting of the Authority 
to beheld at a time and place determined by the Minister or by the members, as the case may 
be. 


--- PAGE 12 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.12-15 
 
 
12 
 
(3) The Authority shall meet at least twice in each period of twelve months from the 
coming into force of this Act. 
Quorum and chairperson’s casting vote. 
13. 
(1) Initially eight members, and after 5 years of coming into force of this Act, six 
members, of the Authority shall form a quorum for any meeting of the Authority. 
(2) At all meetings of the Authority the chairperson or the acting chairperson of the 
Authority shall preside. 
(3) The decision of a majority of the members of the Authority at any meeting thereof 
shall constitute a decision of the Authority, and in the event of an equality of votes in regard 
to any matter, the person presiding at the meeting in question shall have a casting vote in addi-
tion to his deliberative vote. 
(4) A decision taken by or an act done under the authority of the Authority shall not 
be invalid by reason only of an interim vacancy on the Authority or of the fact that a person 
who is disqualified from being a member of the Authority or with respect to whose appoint-
ment the provisions of this Act had not been observed, sat or acted as a member at the time 
when the decision was taken or the act was performed or authorised, if the decision was taken 
or the act performed or authorised by the requisite majority of the members of the Authority 
present at the time who were entitled to sit and act as members. 
Committees of the Authority. 
14. 
(1) The Authority may appoint advisory committees to assist it in the performance of 
its functions and the carrying out of its duties and the persons to be appointed by the Authority 
as members of any such committee may include persons other than members of the Authority. 
(2) There shall be payable to a member of a committee of the Authority, other than a 
member of the Authority or a person who is in the full-time employment of the Government, 
such allowances while that person is engaged in the carrying out of his duties as a member of 
the committee, as the Minister may, in consultation with the Minister of Finance, determine. 
(3) Any allowance which is payable under subsection (2) shall be paid out of the Con-
solidated Fund. 
Budget and reports. 
15. 
(1) The Authority shall establish its own budget and shall submit it to the Minister for 
approval and submission to the Minister for Finance as per requirement. 
(2) The Authority shall review with the Board and the Director the needs required to 
carry out this Act and shall make a submission to the Minister. 
(3) The Authority shall, within six months of the end of each financial year, furnish 
the Minister with a report on the activities of the Authority and of the Board, and any other 
board or task force established by the Authority, and upon any other matter which has been 
referred to it by the Minister. 
(4) At the end of every financial year the Authority shall submit a duly audited state-
ment to the Minister. 
(5) Every report furnished to the Minister under subsections (3) and (4) shall be laid 
before Parliament as soon as possible after receipt thereof. 


--- PAGE 13 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.16-19 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
13 
 
By-laws. 
16. 
The Authority may make by-laws to provide for its own procedures for the perfor-
mance of its work and for its own administration. 
Director. 
17. 
(1) There shall be an office of the Director of the Department of Water Affairs in the 
Ministry responsible for Water Affairs. 
(2) The Director shall possess such formal academic qualifications in the field of  
water resources and have sound experience in water resources management as may be consid-
ered appropriate. 
(3) The Director shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the  
Authority on such terms and conditions as the Minister may determine and for a period not 
exceeding five years, which may be renewed. The Director shall be a member of the Commit-
tee and shall not be eligible to vote. 
(4) The Director shall be the Secretary of the Authority and the duties and responsi-
bilities of his office include — 
 
(a) heading the Department of Water Affairs; 
 
(b) providing technical support and advice to the Authority; 
 
(c) arranging with other ministries for the provision of technical advice and co-
operation when required for the preparation of plans or assisting in the work 
of task forces; 
 
(d) designating inspectors for the purposes of carrying out this Act; 
 
(e) ensuring that appropriate measures including legal action are taken against 
violators of this Act. 
Department of Water Affairs. 
18. 
(1) There shall be established within the Ministry responsible for Water Affairs a 
Department of Water Affairs consisting of professional, technical, administrative, clerical and 
other staff as may be required to enable the Department of Water Affairs to perform its duties. 
(2) The Minister may designate to be included in the Department of Water Affairs, a 
section or a department of the Ministry and such other staff members of the Public Service as 
may be required to support the work of the Department as and when required. 
(3) The Department of Water Affairs shall be the secretariat for the National Water 
Authority. 
PART III 
INTERNATIONAL WATER BODIES 
International Water Bodies. 
19. 
(1) The Joint Water Commission established by the Governments of Eswatini and the 
Republic of South Africa, the Komati Basin Water Authority established by the Governments 
of Eswatini and the Republic of South Africa, and similar commissions, committees or author-
ities which have been or may be established between the Governments of Eswatini, the  
Republic of South Africa, and the Republic of Mozambique are recognised. 


--- PAGE 14 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.19-21 
 
 
14 
 
(2) An amendment or addition to the terms of reference of the Joint Water Commis-
sion shall not be made without the written approval of the Minister, upon the recommendation 
of the Authority. 
(3) The Minister shall, after consultation with the Authority, appoint the appropriate 
number of persons to be the representatives of the Government on a commission, committee 
or authority and the same persons may be appointed to more than one commission, committee 
or authority. 
(4) The representatives of the Government shall be appointed for a period not exceed-
ing three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
(5) The Minister may, after consultation with the Authority, appoint any person to be 
advisor to the representatives. 
(6) The representatives and advisers may not be in the full time employment of the 
Government. 
(7) All proper expenses of the representatives and the advisers and the remuneration 
of any representative or adviser who is not in the full time employment of the Government 
shall, after approval by the Authority, be paid out of the Consolidated Fund. 
(8) The commission, committees, and authorities shall carry out their work in accord-
ance with policy guidelines and directives of the Authority, and any relevant treaties, having 
regard to the requirement of the Plan. 
PART IV 
WATER APPORTIONMENT BOARD 
Establishment of the Water Apportionment Board. 
20. 
(1) There is hereby established a Board to be known as the Water Apportionment 
Board. 
(2) The Board shall dissolve soon after the last of the five basin authorities become 
established in terms of section 33. 
Constitution of the Board. 
21. 
(1) The board shall consist of nine members, who shall be appointed by the Minister 
in accordance with subsections (2), (3) and (4). 
(2) Four members shall be in the employment of the Government and be senior offic-
ers in the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Eswatini Environmental Authority, Min-
istry of Health and Social Welfare and Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy. 
(3) Three members shall be persons who are not in the employment of the Govern-
ment and will be nominated by each of the following agencies: 
 
(a) Eswatini Chamber of Commerce and Industry; 
 
(b) Eswatini Sugar Association or Eswatini Citrus Board;  
 
(c) Eswatini Water Services Corporation. 
(4) There shall be two members of the Board, one representing Eswatini Nation Land 
farmers and one representing small growers on title deed land. 


--- PAGE 15 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.21-24 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
15 
 
(5) The members shall be appointed for a single renewable period not exceeding three 
years on such terms and conditions as the Minister may determine. 
(6) The Minister shall appoint as an alternate to a member a person with similar affili-
ation as that member. 
(7) An alternate member shall be entitled to attend any meeting of the Board but shall 
not be entitled to vote unless the member for whom the alternate is appointed is absent. 
(8) If a member or alternate is to be appointed from a list referred to in subsections (3) 
and (4), the Minister shall by notice in writing invite the organisation or organisations con-
cerned to recommend the name of the person to be appointed to the Board within a specified 
period. 
(9) If the recommendations required under subsection (5) are not lodged with the 
Minister within the period stated in the Minister’s notice inviting such recommendations, the 
Minister may appoint such person or persons as the Minister considers suitable for the  
appointment or appointments from the appropriate organisation(s) referred to in subsections 
(3) and (4). 
Chairperson and vice chairperson. 
22. 
The Minister shall designate one of the members as chairperson and another member as 
vice chairperson of the Board, and if the chairperson or vice chairperson is absent or unable to 
perform the functions of chairperson or vice chairperson, the members shall designate one 
member to act as chairperson. 
Disqualification, termination of membership and filling of vacancies. 
23. 
(1) A person shall not be appointed to hold office as a member or an alternate mem-
ber of the Board it that person — 
 
(a) is an unrehabilitated insolvent; 
 
(b) has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment without the 
option of a fine; or 
 
(c) is of unsound mind. 
(2) 
After consultation with the relevant organisation the Minister may remove from office 
any member of the Board which he appointed under section 21 if that member — 
 
(a) has failed to comply with a condition of the appointment; 
 
(b) in the opinion of the Minister, has been guilty of improper conduct or has 
habitually neglected the duties as a member of the Board; or 
 
(c) has been absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board and did not 
provide written notice giving good reasons for being absent. 
(3) If any member of the Board ceases to hold office, the Minister shall, with due  
regard to section 21, appoint a person to fill the vacancy on the Board. 
(4) The alternate to a member who has ceased to be a member shall continue to have 
the authority and rights of an alternate until the appointment as an alternate expires or is ter-
minated. 
Meetings of the Board. 
24. 
(1) Meetings of the Board shall, subject to subsection (2), be held as such times and 
places as may be determined by the Board or, if at the close of any meeting the Board has not 


--- PAGE 16 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.24-28 
 
 
16 
 
determined the time and place for its next meeting, the chairperson of the Board shall deter-
mine that time and place. 
(2) The chairperson of the Board shall, when directed thereto by the Authority, or on 
the written demand of three members of the Board, call a special meeting of the Board to be 
held at a time and place determined by the Authority or by the three members of the Board as 
the case may be. 
(3) Members of the Board and their alternates in making decisions shall exercise their 
discretion independently and not as agents of the Department or organisation which they rep-
resent. 
Quorum, decision and chairperson’s casting vote. 
25. 
(1) Six members of the Board shall form a quorum for any meeting of the Board. 
(2) The chairperson of the Board shall preside at all meetings of the Board. 
(3) The decision of the majority of the members of the Board present at any meeting 
shall constitute a decision of the Board, and in the event of an equality of votes in regard to 
any matter, the person presiding at the meeting in question shall have a casting vote in addi-
tion to that person’s deliberative vote. 
(4) A decision taken by or act done under the authority of the Board shall not be  
in-valid by reason only of on interim vacancy on the Board or of the fact that a person who is 
disqualified from being a member the Board, or with respect to whose appointment the provi-
sions of this Act had not been observed, sat or acted as a member at the time when the deci-
sion was taken or the act was performed or authorised, if the decision was taken or the act 
performed or authorised by the requisite majority of the members of the Board present at the 
time who were entitled to sit and act as members. 
(5) Where a member has a vested interest in a matter being considered by the Board, 
such that it would constitute a conflict of interest, that member shall declare the interest and 
not be part of the deliberation of the Board on that matter, as the Board may determine. 
Committees of the Board. 
26. 
(1) The Board may appoint advisory committees to assist it in the performance of its 
functions and the carrying out of its duties and the persons to be appointed by the Board as 
members of any such committee may include persons other than members of the Board. 
(2) There shall be payable to a member of a committee of the Board, other than a 
member of the Board or a person who is in the full-time employment of the Government, such 
remuneration or allowances, while engaged in the carrying out of any duties as a member of 
the committee, as the Minister may, in consultation with the Minister of Finance, determine. 
Administrative and other work of the Board. 
27. 
(1) The Secretariat established under section 18 shall support the work of the Board. 
(2) If the Secretariat lacks skill in a certain area, the Board may secure that skill in or 
out of Government for as long as it may be necessary. 
Powers of the Board. 
28. 
(1) The Board shall have all the powers necessary or which reasonably appear to the 
Board to be necessary to achieve its objects or to perform its duties. 


--- PAGE 17 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
s.28 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
17 
 
(2) Without limiting the powers of the Board set out in subsection (1), the Board shall 
have the power — 
 
(a) to consider, amend, grant or reject an application for a permit or an effluent 
control permit; 
 
(b) to issue a permit or an effluent control permit containing such terms and con-
ditions as it deems appropriate; 
 
(c) to issue well drilling and groundwater abstraction permit containing such 
terms and conditions as it deems appropriate; 
 
(d) subject to the provisions of this Act, to amend or cancel any permit, an efflu-
ent control permit, or well drilling permit or a groundwater abstraction per-
mit; 
 
(e) to ensure that inspections, inquiries and tests are made to see if any breach of 
the terms or conditions of a permit, an effluent control permit or of this Act is 
being or has been committed; 
 
(f) to take such steps as may be appropriate to enforce the terms and conditions 
of a permit, an effluent control permit, a well drilling permit or a groundwater 
abstraction permit; 
 
(g) to ensure that devices in the field are properly constructed, operated and 
maintained; 
 
(h) to ensure that dams are constructed, operated and maintained safely and rec-
ommend to the Authority safety guidelines appropriate for various types of 
dams; 
 
(i) to inspect any works to ensure that they are constructed, operated or main-
tained in a safe condition and without undue wastage of water; 
 
(j) to liaise with the Eswatini Environment Authority for the setting of periodic 
review of effluent standards; 
 
(k) to issue instructions to the holder of any permit or effluent control permit or 
owner or operator of any works, to put the works into a safe condition at the 
expense of the permit holder or owner or operator, and if such instructions are 
not obeyed promptly, to have the work done by others and to recover the 
costs in any court of competent jurisdiction; 
 
(l) to delegate by written authority to any person or persons any power which the 
Board may have under the provision of this Act as set out in such written au-
thority; 
 
(m) to delegate to any association of permit holders, whether legally incorporated 
or not, the authority to distribute the total permitted quantity of water among its 
members as it may decide, and to exercise such powers of the Board related to 
the enforcement or permits or of the provisions of this Act within the area of the 
association’s control as the Board may in writing provide; 
 
(n) to prepare a budget and submit it to the Authority for approval and forward-
ing to the Minister; 
 
(o) to pass by laws to provide for its own procedures for the performance of its 
own work and its own administration. 


--- PAGE 18 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.29-30 
 
 
18 
 
Establishment and keeping of registers. 
29. 
The Board shall establish and keep, in the prescribed form, registers of all permits and 
temporary permits issued, varied, withdrawn or cancelled by it under this Act or the repealed Act. 
Inquiries by the Board and hearing of applications for servitudes. 
30. 
(1) The Board may, in accordance with this section, conduct an inquiry into any mat-
ter falling within the scope of its functions, powers and duties and for that purpose may, by 
registered letter signed by its chairperson or acting chairperson, summon any person to give 
evidence at the inquiry or to produce any book, document or thing which may, in the opinion 
of the Board, be relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry. 
(2) The Board may call and examine any person present at the inquiry, whether or not 
that person has been summoned to attend under subsection (1), and may inspect and retain for 
a reasonable period any book, document or thing the production of which was required under 
subsection (1): 
Provided that, in connection with the examination of any such person or the production 
of any such book, document or thing, the law relating to privilege as applicable to a person 
subpoenaed to give evidence or to produce any book, document or thing before a court of law, 
shall apply. 
(3) Whenever the Board deems it necessary to do so, it may direct any person to give 
evidence at any such inquiry on oath or affirmation, and the member of the Board presiding at 
such inquiry may administer the oath to, or accept an affirmation from, such person. 
(4) The person who has been summoned to give evidence at such inquiry shall be  
entitled to receive as witness fees and expenses, an amount equal to the amount, which would 
have been received as witness fees and expenses, if summoned to attend at a criminal trial in 
the High Court. 
(5) A person shall be guilty of an offence if — 
 
(a) having been summoned to give evidence at an inquiry under subsection (1), 
he fails to attend at the time and place specified in the summons, or fails to 
remain in attendance until the conclusion of the inquiry, or until excused from 
further attendance by the member of the Board presiding at the inquiry, or 
fails to produce any book, document or thing in that person’s possession or 
custody or under that person’s control, which that person has been summoned 
to produce, without having sufficient cause; or 
 
(b) having been summoned under subsection (1), or called under subsection (2), the 
person refuses to be sworn or to make an affirmation as a witness after being  
directed by the Board to do so; or 
 
(c) without sufficient cause, he refuses to give evidence or refuses or fails to an-
swer fully and satisfactorily to the best of that person’s knowledge and belief 
any questions lawfully asked. 
(6) If requested to do so by any witness or any other person and on good cause shown 
to the satisfaction of the Board, the Board shall hear the evidence in camera. 
(7) If any person who is entitled to claim any servitude in terms of section 53 is unable 
to reach an agreement with the person from whom the servitude is claimed as to the terms of the 
servitude or compensation, if any, to be paid in respect thereof, either of the parties to the 


--- PAGE 19 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.30-32 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
19 
 
dispute may in writing submit the matter in dispute to the Board for decision, and the Board 
shall, after making such investigation and inquiry as to it may appear necessary, make such 
order in regard to the matter in question as it may deem just, and any order so made shall be 
binding upon the said parties. 
(8) In determining any matter mentioned in subsection (7), the Board may, upon the 
application of any of the parties to the said dispute, make such order as to costs as it may 
deem just in accordance with the scale of costs under the provisions of section 18 of the  
Acquisition of Property Act, 1961. 
(9) An order made by the Board under subsection (7) shall, if the Board so directs, be 
registered by the Registrar of Deeds against the title deed of any land to which the order refers 
and shall be recorded in the appropriate registers in the Deeds Office, and the proprietor of 
any such land shall produce the title deeds for the purpose. 
(10) A person who, during any sitting of the Board, wilfully insults a member thereof 
or any other person attending at such sitting, or wilfully obstructs or interferes with any such 
member or other person in the execution of the duties required to be performed in terms of 
this section, or wilfully interrupts the proceedings of the Board or otherwise misbehaves in the 
place where the Board is sitting, shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to the 
penalties mentioned in section 90. 
Annual Reports. 
31. 
The Board shall, within four months after the end of each financial year, furnish the 
Authority with a report on the activities of the Board during that financial year and upon any 
other matter with which the Authority may require the Board to deal. 
Appeals from decisions of the Board or Authority. 
32. 
(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board may appeal to the High Court on 
one or more of the following grounds: 
 
(a) that the person was improperly refused the right to appear before the Board as 
a party; 
 
(b) that the Board exceeded its jurisdiction; 
 
(c) that the Board failed to exercise a jurisdiction which it was required to exer-
cise; 
 
(d) that the Board found that no compensation was payable; 
 
(e) that the amount or value of compensation arrived at by the Board is wrong; 
 
(f) that there was an error in law appearing on the face of the decision itself. 
(2) The rules of the High Court shall apply to such an appeal. 
(3) A party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may also appeal to the Authority. 
(4) An appeal against a decision of the Authority may be made to the High Court on a 
point of law only. 
(5) Any appeal from a decision of the Board shall be taken by instituting proceedings 
in the High Court or by filing a notice of appeal with the Authority within three months from 
the date the decision appealed against is made, unless the High Court or the Authority, as the 
case may be, extends the time on good cause shown. 


--- PAGE 20 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
s.33 
 
 
20 
 
River Basin Authorities. 
33. 
(1) The Minister shall within five years of coming into force of this Act, establish 
upon the recommendation of the Authority and subject to subsection (7), five River Basin 
Authorities by notice in the Gazette. 
(2) River Basin Authorities shall be established to implement a management plan  
under the Water Resources Master Plan dealing with a specific geographical basin area. 
(3) The notice shall state the name of the River Basin Authority and shall define its 
objects, powers and areas within which it shall operate. 
(4) A River Basin Authority shall be a body corporate capable of suing and being 
sued own name, and shall have such other powers as a body corporate may have. 
(5) The composition of a River Basin Authority shall be determined by regulation, but 
subject to the following: 
 
(a) a River Basin Authority shall consist of among others representatives of all 
the relevant water sectors in the basin in question; 
 
(b) water sector representative for purposes of the composition of the River Basin 
Authority shall be elected by interested or affected stakeholders; 
 
(c) election of representatives will occur by nomination within sixty days after 
notice in the Gazette and two newspapers in circulation in the affected areas; 
 
(d) the Authority shall appoint one of the nominated candidates of each water 
sector to become a member of the River Basin Authority; 
 
(e) in the event of the failure of any of the water sectors to nominate candidates, 
the Minister may appoint representatives for these water sectors; 
 
(f) for the purposes of this section, water sectors are classified as belonging to 
one of the following user sectors: domestic, agriculture, forestry, conservation 
and mining/industry. 
(6) The objects of a River Basin Authority are to conform to and to implement the 
Water Resources Master Plan, and to advise the Authority on basin issues. 
(7) The powers, duties and functions of River Basin Authorities shall be laid down by 
the Minister and shall include the following: 
 
(a) to keep a data base of basin information, including water availability and  
water demand data, and to monitor and keep record of changes in water con-
ditions in the basin; 
 
(b) to issue, amend and renew or suspend water permits; 
 
(c) to impose water restrictions on all water users in times of water shortage; 
 
(d) to investigate the need for water resources development and management and 
to advise the Authority on the need to appoint Project Boards; 
 
(e) to investigate the need for inter-basin transfers, to negotiate it with other basin 
authorities, and to advise the Authority in respect thereof; 
 
(f) to arbitrate user disputes; 
 
(g) to monitor and control water quality and enforce effluent regulations; 


--- PAGE 21 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.33-37 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
21 
 
 
(h) subject to the approval of the Authority, to levy and collect rates and charge 
to defray part or all costs of the River Basin Authority; 
 
(i) have authority over Irrigation Districts, Project Boards and User Associations. 
(8) The powers and objects may be altered, expanded or reduced from time to time by 
the Minister on the recommendation of the Authority by notice in the Gazette. 
(9) All powers vested in the Board shall automatically be transferred to each River 
Basin Authority as soon as that River Basin Authority is established. 
PART V 
PERMIT FOR THE USE OF WATER 
The right in water. 
34. 
(1) All water found naturally in Eswatini is hereby declared a national resource. 
(2) There shall be no private right of property in any water found naturally in Eswatini. 
(3) A right to divert, store, or use water, shall not be acquired by prescription. 
(4) It shall not be necessary for any person or community to obtain a permit for the 
use of water for primary purposes. 
Application for a permit. 
35. 
(1) An application for a permit shall be made to the Board. 
(2) Every person who applies for a permit under this Act or to renew or amend a per-
mit shall comply with the regulations with respect to filing the application, giving notice of 
such application, and paying the prescribed application fee, if any, and shall furnish such in-
formation, plans and specifications as the Board may require. 
(3) An application shall clearly indicate the intended use of water to be made under 
the permit. 
(4) The Board shall give prompt notice to the Authority on every application received. 
(5) The Board may issue, renew or amend a permit without the consent of the Author-
ity unless such permit does not conform to the Water Resources Master Plan, in which case 
the consent of the Authority shall be necessary. 
Objections to application. 
36. 
(1) Any person who considers that rights of that person would be adversely affected 
by the granting of the permit applied for, may, within thirty days of receiving notice of the 
application, or such longer period as the Regulations may provide, file an objection in writing 
with the Board, giving full reasons for the objection. 
(2) On receipt of an objection referred to in subsection (1), the Board shall consider 
the objection, hear the objector, and its decision shall be final. 
Powers of the Board with respect to an application. 
37. 
(1) The Board may, with respect to any application for a permit — 
 
(a) refuse the application; 
 
(b) amend the application in any respect; 
 
(c) grant the application in whole or in part; 


--- PAGE 22 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.37-39 
 
 
22 
 
 
(d) require additional information, plans or specifications; or 
 
(e) issue to the applicant one or more permits on such terms and conditions as the 
Board considers proper. 
(2) With respect to any application for the renewal of a permit, such renewal shall not 
be refused without good reason. 
(3) Without limiting the Board’s discretion, a permit may contain — 
 
(a) limitations as to the time or hours of the day when water may be diverted, 
stored, or used; 
 
(b) authority to divert, store, or use different quantities of water at different times 
of the year; or 
 
(c) the specifications as to the records to be maintained by the permit holder. 
(4) The permit shall be made appurtenant to specifically defined land, or to a specific 
industrial undertaking, or to a specific local authority or person, which will distribute the water 
generally to members of the public. 
(5) A permit to divert or store water shall specify the point at which the water is to be 
diverted from the watercourse or the place of storage. 
(6) A permit to divert or use water for agricultural purposes shall specify the methods 
to be used to collect surplus or used water and the point at which surplus or used water is to be 
returned to the watercourse. 
(7) A permit to divert or use water for an industrial undertaking shall specify the vol-
ume which may be consumed in the process of the undertaking and the point at which the 
water shall be returned to the watercourse. 
(8) A permit to divert or use water for a local authority shall specify the volume to be 
consumed and the point at which the water shall be returned to the watercourse. 
(9) A permit to divert or use water for agricultural or industrial purposes or for a local 
authority shall require the permit holder to install and maintain adequate devises to measure 
and record the flow rate and volume of water diverted or used. 
(10) Subject to section 93(9) a permit shall be renewed every five years or such other 
period as may be prescribed by regulation. 
Emergencies. 
38. 
(1) In an emergency whether natural or otherwise, the Board or its authorised delegate 
may by notice, suspend a permit or a temporary permit in whole or in part and may give  
instructions to the holder of the permit or temporary permit as to the diversion, storage or use 
of water as the Board or its delegate may deem appropriate. 
(2) The notice and instruction referred to in subsection (1), shall be given by such 
means as may seem to the Board or its authorised delegate to be appropriate, but if not given 
in writing, they shall be confirmed in writing as soon as may be reasonably practical. 
Drought conditions. 
39. 
(1) If any time it is found that due to climatic conditions there is insufficient water 
available in any watercourse to satisfy all permit holders according to the quantities permitted 
to them, the Board shall by notice served by registered mail on all permit holders on that  
watercourse, reduce proportionately the amount of water allowed to the permit holders. 


--- PAGE 23 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.39-41 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
23 
 
(2) A permit holder of water for domestic consumption or stock watering need not be 
required to reduce the amount of water allowed in the permit. 
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), a permit holder for water used for domestic con-
sumption or stock watering may be required to reduce the amount allowed in the permit in the 
event of more serious drought.  
Change in flows. 
40. 
(1) If it is found that for any reason beyond the reasonable control of the Board the 
natural flow in a watercourse available to all users has dropped so that more water is permitted 
to be diverted, stored or used than is available in the watercourse, the Board shall hold a public 
hearing into the matter and thereafter may amend any or all permits to divert, store, or use water 
from that watercourse in an equitable and fair manner as the Board may deem appropriate. 
(2) A compensation shall not be payable in respect of any reduction ordered by the 
Board pursuant to sections 38, 39 and 40. 
Cancellation. 
41. 
(1) Every permit and all rights under it are subject to cancellation or variation in 
whole or in part by the Board, if — 
 
(a) the permit holder has applied for cancellation; 
 
(b) the permit holder has failed for three successive years to make use of the  
water for the purpose and in the manner authorised by the permit; 
 
(c) the permit holder has failed to complete the construction of the works author-
ised by the permit within the time specified by the permit; 
 
(d) the permit holder has failed for two successive years to pay any fees due to 
the Board with respect to the permit; 
 
(e) the permit holder has for six months failed to pay any water bailiffs fees payable; 
 
(f) the permit holder has failed to comply with this Act, the regulations, or any 
term or condition of the permit, or of an effluent permit, or any term or condi-
tion of an effluent permit issued in conjunction with the permit; 
 
(g) the permit holder has failed to comply with a lawful order of the Board or of 
its duly authorised delegate; or 
 
(h) the permit holder made a material misstatement in the application for a permit 
or in information provided to the Board with respect to such application; 
 
(i) it is in the public interest to do so. 
(2) If the Board proposes to cancel a permit in whole or in part on any ground speci-
fied in subsection (1), it shall give notice by registered mail to the permit holder and to the 
proprietor of any lands or undertaking to which the permit is appurtenant, and shall cause a 
notice of its intention to be published in a local newspaper once a week for three consecutive 
weeks. 
(3) If the Board, within four weeks of the mailing of the notice or the last publication 
of the notice in a local newspaper, has received an objection to the proposed cancellation from 
a person claiming to be interested in the permit, the Board shall hold a hearing within eight 
weeks, and shall then decide whether to cancel the permit in whole or in part or to allow the 


--- PAGE 24 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.41-44 
 
 
24 
 
permit to remain in effect and, if so, subject to such amended or additional items and condi-
tions as the Board may consider proper. 
Compensation in the event of cancellation. 
42. 
(1) There shall be no compensation paid in the event of a permit cancelled in terms of 
sections 41(1)(a) to (h). 
(2) If the Board decides in terms of section 41(1)(i) that the permit should be can-
celled in whole or in part in the public interest, it shall also decide whether compensation will 
be paid, and the amount of compensation payable for such cancellation, and the party or par-
ties, including the Government, who should pay such compensation, and the party or parties to 
whom such compensation should be paid. 
(3) In deciding the amount of compensation payable the Board shall apply mutatis 
mutandis the provisions of section 15 of the Acquisition of Property Act, 1961. 
(4) Compensation shall be paid on cancellation or not later than three months from 
the date of cancellation. 
Transfer of permit. 
43. 
(1) Every permit which is made appurtenant to land shall pass with the proprietorship 
of that land. 
(2) Every permit which is made appurtenant to an industrial undertaking shall, subject 
to the provisions of section 63 and section 69, pass with the proprietorship or the undertaking. 
(3) The Board shall, upon receipt of evidence of the transfer of proprietorship and upon 
payment of the prescribed fee, if any, apportion the rights under the permit proportionately 
among the new parcels of land, and shall issue new permits appurtenant to the new parcels of 
land, and shall thereupon cancel the prior permit. 
(4) If land to which a permit is appurtenant is subdivided, the Board shall upon the 
request for the subdivision, and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, apportion the rights 
under the permit among the new parcels of land and shall issue new permits appurtenant to the 
new parcels of land and shall thereupon cancel the prior permit. 
Duties of the permit holder. 
44. 
The holder of a permit shall at all times — 
 
(a) divert, store, or use the water strictly in conformity with this Act and with the 
terms and conditions of the permit; 
 
(b) avoid, as far as may be reasonable, any inefficiency or waste in the use of the 
water; 
 
(c) keep such records as may be called for and permit the Board omits authorised 
delegate to inspect and make copies of such records at all reasonable times; 
 
(d) maintain all works in a safe condition and carry out all orders of the Board or 
its authorised delegate with respect to the repair of works within the time 
specified in such order or, if no time is specified, within a reasonable time; 
 
(e) renew the permit on time; 
 
(f) surrender the permit as soon as it is no longer wanted; and 
 
(g) comply with all lawful orders of the Board or Authority. 


--- PAGE 25 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.45-46 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
25 
 
Watercourse used for Eswatini law and custom. 
45. 
Notwithstanding this Act, a permit or temporary permit issued by virtue of this Act, no 
works shall be constructed and no water shall be diverted, stored, or used from or in any wa-
tercourse or portion thereof which: 
 
(i) is sacred with special significance and has been declared by local authority; or  
 
(ii) has been gazetted by any lawful authority for such purpose. 
PART VI 
GROUND WATER 
Borehole drilling permit. 
46. 
(1) A person shall not drill or sink a borehole or well on any land or expand an existing 
drilled or bored well without having applied for and obtained a drilling permit from the Board. 
(2) Subject to section 54, in an application for a drilling permit under subsection (1), 
the applicant shall supply the Board with the following information: 
 
(a) the exact location of the intended borehole site; 
 
(b) the estimated duration of completion of the works; 
 
(c) the methods of borehole surface completion and the estimated depth of the 
well; 
 
(d) reason for the borehole or expansion of the well. 
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), a person may not apply for a drilling permit  
unless — 
 
(a) the applicant holds the necessary drilling qualifications; 
 
(b) the applicant is a registered company in Eswatini whose memorandum and 
articles of association relate to water works and in particular borehole drill-
ing; 
 
(c) the applicant possesses sufficient working capital to ensure the development 
and carrying out of the drilling operation. 
(4) Every person who applies for a borehole drilling permit under this Act shall com-
ply with the regulations with respect to filing the application, giving notice of such application 
and paying the prescribed application fee, if any. 
(5) In considering an application for a drilling permit, the Board shall have regard to 
the following matters: 
 
(a) the qualifications of the applicant and the ability to ensure that the drilling 
works is carried out optimally and safely; 
 
(b) the suitability of the location cited for drilling; 
 
(c) the manner and scale in which the applicant intends to drill; 
 
(d) the methods of any pump test to be undertaken; 
 
(e) the manner in which the applicant intends to rehabilitate disturbance on the 
surface which may be caused by the drilling; 
 
(f) the potential environmental impact; 


--- PAGE 26 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.46-50 
 
 
26 
 
 
(g) the potential effect on other permit holders and users of groundwater in the 
area; 
 
(h) the reasons for the application. 
(6) When issuing a drilling permit, the Board may impose terms and conditions in-
cluding — 
 
(a) the tests to be done to determine long term yield and aquifer characteristics 
and other related tests; 
 
(b) water quality tests and reports which must be prepared; 
 
(c) limiting the space between the wells; 
 
(d) prescribing the records to be maintained by the driller and submitted to the 
Board. 
Completion or abandonment of borehole drilling. 
47. 
The driller of any borehole or well shall within ten days of the completion or abandon-
ment of the drilling works, notify the Board in writing and send a completed copy of the rec-
ord as required in terms of section 46 (6) together with the following: 
 
(a) the log of the lithology and depth of the geological formations drilled 
through; 
 
(b) the depth of the borehole or well; 
 
(c) levels at which water is struck and subsequently rests. 
Permit for ground water abstraction. 
48. 
(1) A person shall not abstract groundwater without a permit having been applied for 
and obtained from the Board. 
(2) A permit for abstracting water may contain such terms and conditions as the 
Board considers proper. 
(3) Without limiting the general discretion of the Board as set out in subsection (2), a 
permit may contain provisions — 
 
(a) limiting the amount of water to be abstracted; 
 
(b) limiting the rate of abstraction; 
 
(c) prescribing the use or uses or the place to which or on which water may be 
used; 
 
(d) limiting the times of the year or the times of day during which water may be 
abstracted. 
Abandonment of a borehole. 
49. 
If a permit holder no longer intends to use a borehole or well for abstraction of groundwa-
ter, the permit holder shall advise the Board and take such measures as prescribed by regulation 
to securely close the borehole or well and prevent pollution of groundwater sources. 
Abstraction permit for existing borehole or well. 
50. 
(1) Everyone who owns or controls a borehole or well shall, within six months of the 
date of commencement of this Act or such other period as the Board may allow, supply the 
Board with all relevant information on all boreholes or wells drilled before the commence-
ment of this Act. 


--- PAGE 27 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.50-54 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
27 
 
(2) A person who is the owner of a borehole or well and who uses that borehole or 
well shall, within two years of this Act coming into force or within such longer period as the 
Minister may by notice in the Gazette allow, apply to the Board for an abstraction permit in 
terms of section 48. 
(3) When an abstraction permit has been issued, a person referred to in subsection (2) 
shall not use the borehole or well except in accordance with the terms and conditions of that 
permit. 
Interdependency of the permits. 
51. 
The Board shall not issue a borehole drilling permit unless the application for that per-
mit is accompanied by a groundwater abstraction permit under section 48. 
PART VII 
SERVITUDE 
Exclusion of Eswatini Nation Land. 
52. 
This part of the Act does not apply to servitudes over Eswatini Nation Land except as 
specifically provided in section 61. 
Acquisition of servitude. 
53. 
(1) A holder of a permit or holder of an effluent control permit or a person who  
intends to use water for a primary purpose may acquire by agreement, or subject to the provi-
sions of section 58, by application, a servitude over the land of another person in order to  
enjoy the benefits of that permit or any rights under this Act. 
(2) A servitude may be permanent or temporary, but a temporary servitude shall be 
for a period not longer than three years. 
Power of entry upon land and mode of acquiring servitude. 
54. 
(1) Any person who requires a servitude may, not earlier than sixty days after giving a 
written notice to the proprietor of the land in question and to the Board, enter upon that land 
and make any investigations and undertake any operations thereon which that person may 
consider necessary for the purpose of determining the extent and nature of the servitude  
required, and, in the exercise of such powers of entry, such person may — 
 
(a) search, dig, excavate, bore or carry out any works or investigations which 
may be necessary for the discovery, gauging or measurement or the estab-
lishment of the chemical composition of any water rising from spring, well or 
fountain, or flowing in any river, watercourse or channel; 
 
(b) take any steps necessary to determine the levels, direction or flow or chemical 
composition of any water contained or flowing in any underground reservoirs 
or channels; and  
 
(c) search, dig, excavate and carry out any works necessary to determine the suit-
ability of any site for the construction of storage or other works in relation to 
the supply of water or the disposal of effluent or waste. 
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1), a person shall not enter into any 
building or upon any enclosed space attached to a dwelling, except with the consent of the 
occupier thereof. 


--- PAGE 28 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.54-55 
 
 
28 
 
(3) In the exercise of the powers under subsection (1), as little damage as possible 
shall be caused, and such compensation as may be agreed upon, or failing agreement, deter-
mined by the Board, shall be paid by the person causing the damage for all damage so caused, 
or otherwise the person shall repair any damage. 
(4) Any person referred to in subsection (1) shall, in any notice to the proprietor 
claiming a servitude, set forth according to the nature of the servitude — 
 
(a) the point of diversion which is proposed; 
 
(b) the line of passage along which the water is to be conducted or diverted; 
 
(c) the locality on which the water is to be stored and the approximate area which 
will be submerged; 
 
(d) the nature and locality of any works which it is proposed to construct; 
 
(e) the location and area of any land required for the disposal of waste or effluent; 
 
(f) the quantity and nature of the material required from the land for the purpose 
of constructing works and the place from which it is proposed to take such 
material; 
 
(g) the land required temporarily for construction camps and permanently for the 
residence of persons and for workshops or storage purposes necessary in con-
nection with the operation and maintenance of the works in question; 
 
(h) the compensation which is offered, if any, and manner in which such com-
pensation has been assessed; and 
 
(i) whether a temporary or permanent servitude is required and, if temporary, the 
period of time during which the person wishes to enjoy the servitude; and 
shall attach to the notice a plan showing the position, locality and nature of 
any proposed works in respect of which that servitude is claimed. 
(5) If the proprietor does not, within one month after the service of a notice claiming a 
servitude, agree to the claim, or to any particulars stated in the notice, or to any other matter 
necessary for the servitude, and to the embodiment of such particulars and other matters in a 
deed of agreement and to execute such deed by a notary, the claimant may apply to the Board 
for the settlement of the several matters in dispute. 
(6) The person claiming a servitude shall, when serving notice thereof upon the pro-
prietor of the land affected, transmit by registered post to any mortgagee and to every person 
shown upon the title deed of such land or in the records of any Government office in which 
rights granted under any law relating to prospecting or mining are recorded, to have any inter-
est in such land and whose whereabouts can readily be ascertained, a copy of that notice and 
of every annexure thereto. 
Rights conferred by servitude. 
55. 
(1) A servitude obtained under this Act, unless the agreement specifically provides to 
the contrary, shall include the right for the holder to — 
 
(a) occupy and use so much of the land of another as may reasonably be required 
for the construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair, or  
improvement of works for diverting, storing, or using water or for the drain-
age of land; 


--- PAGE 29 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.55-58 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
29 
 
 
(b) take and remove from the land within the boundaries of a servitude any mate-
rial or substance which may not be required for the works; 
 
(c) bring onto the land within the boundaries of a servitude any material or sub-
stance which may be required for the works; 
 
(d) cut down, remove or destroy any tree, vegetation, rocks or other obstruction 
which may be a danger to the works, subject to any applicable law; 
 
(e) construct, maintain and occupy residences, workshops or storage facilities 
which may be required for employees of the permit holder in order to operate 
and maintain the works; 
 
(f) secure an undertaking by the proprietor of the land over which the servitude is 
obtained not to do or permit others to do anything, inside or outside the 
boundaries of the servitude, which may in any way endanger the security of 
the works or interfere with the enjoyment by the owner of his rights under the 
permit; and 
 
(g) secure for a temporary servitude, the right to construct, maintain and remove 
all camps, access roads or other facilities reasonably required for the con-
struction, reconstruction, repair or improvement of the works. 
(2) Subject to any applicable law, the holder of the servitude may, in addition to rights 
under the servitude, cut down any tree or remove any rock or other object which may be or 
may become a danger to the security of the works whether such tree, rock or other object is 
within or without the boundaries of the servitude. 
(3) Upon the application of the proprietor or permit holder the Board shall determine 
whether in exercising rights under subsection (2), the permit holder shall pay compensation to 
the proprietor for any tree, rock, or other object removed and for any damage caused in such 
removal. 
Use by servient proprietor. 
56. 
If the proprietor of the land over which a servitude is obtained is also a permit holder, 
that proprietor may also use the works constructed on such servitude for the benefit of that 
proprietor, provided the proprietor pays a proper proportion of the costs of construction,  
reconstruction, operation, maintenance, repair, or improvement of the works, and provided 
further that the use made of the works by the proprietor does not prevent or hinder the owner 
of the servitude from exercising the rights to the full benefit of the permit of the owner of the 
servitude. 
Crossing roads, etc.. 
57. 
A servitude to cross a public road, a railway line, or surface or underground installation 
of any public utility or local authority shall include a requirement that the permit holder shall 
obtain the consent of the entity owning or controlling such road, railway line, or installation as 
to the nature of the works and the methods of construction operation and maintenance of the 
works. 
Application for servitude. 
58. 
(1) If the holder of a permit or holder of an effluent control permit or a person who 
intends to use water for a primary purpose and the proprietor of the lands over which a servitude 


--- PAGE 30 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.58-61 
 
 
30 
 
is required cannot reach agreement as to the terms and conditions of the servitude or the com-
pensation to be paid, the permit holder or such other person may apply in writing to the Board 
for authority to obtain a servitude. The applicant shall serve a copy of such application on the 
proprietor of the land over which the servitude is required. 
(2) If a servitude is granted by agreement, the grantee of the servitude shall submit to 
the Board a certified copy of such agreement and the terms of compensation if any. 
(3) The Board shall in terms of section 30, hold a hearing on the application within 
sixty days and may grant a servitude containing such terms and conditions, and on payment of 
such compensation, if any, as the Board deems appropriate, or it may refuse the application. 
(4) The holder of a permit or the holder of an effluent control permit or a person who 
intends to use the water for primary purposes, may not exercise any rights under the servitude 
granted by the Board until there has been an agreement on or determination of the terms of 
payment of the compensation awarded by the Board. 
(5) Upon satisfaction that the terms of subsection (2) or (4) on compensation have 
been fulfilled, the Board shall send a certified copy of the grant to the Registrar of Deeds in 
terms of section 30(9). 
(6) The Registrar of Deeds shall make a notation of the servitude against the title 
deeds of the land subject to the servitude and in favour of the lands to which the permit is 
appurtenant. 
Claims of misuse. 
59. 
(1) If any dispute arises between the owner of a servitude and the proprietor of the 
land subject to the servitude from any alleged use or misuse of the terms and conditions of the 
servitude or from any damage alleged to have been incurred by either party due to the wrong-
ful or negligent act or failure to act of the other, the aggrieved party may apply for redress in 
writing to the Board and shall serve the other party with a copy of the application. 
(2) The Board shall hold a hearing and shall inquire into the matter and shall make 
such order as it deems appropriate. 
Person acquiring servitude to construct access bridges, etc.. 
60. 
Every person who constructs works for the passage, drainage, diversion or disposal of 
water which prevent any land being passed over freely or onto by the owner of the land, or 
which check the circulation of water in the irrigation on drainage of such land, shall at the 
expense of that person construct and maintain and repair such bridges and other works as will 
make passage or other communication reasonably safe and convenient, and such culverts, 
aqueducts and other works as are necessary to secure the free circulation of such water, unless 
that person be exempt from such duty by agreement or otherwise. 
Servitude over Eswatini Nation Land. 
61. 
(1) If a holder of a permit or holder of an effluent control permit or a person who  
intends to use the water for a primary purpose wishes to obtain a servitude, whether temporary 
or permanent, over Eswatini Nation Land, that person shall first obtain the agreement of the 
Minister as to terms and conditions of the servitude requested and the compensation payable, 
if any. 
(2) The Minister may direct the permit holder or the primary purpose user to apply to 
the Board as provided in section 53. 


--- PAGE 31 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.61-64 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
31 
 
(3) In the event of failure to reach any agreement and upon receipt of the application 
by the Board, the Board shall hold a hearing into the matter. 
(4) After the hearing the Board shall recommend to the Minister whether a servitude 
should be granted and, if so, the terms and conditions thereof and the amount of compensation 
payable, and — 
 
(a) if the servitude is a temporary servitude, the Minister may grant the servitude 
on such terms and conditions as the Minister may deem fit; 
 
(b) if the servitude is to be a permanent servitude, the Minister may, with the 
specific written consent of the Ngwenyama, grant such servitude upon the 
terms recommended by the Board or on such other terms as the Ngwenyama 
may require. 
PART VIII 
CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
Effluent control permit. 
62. 
(1) A person who — 
 
(a) is using water for an industrial purpose or local authority purpose; or 
 
(b) applies for a permit or amends a permit to divert, store, or use water for an 
industrial purpose or local authority purpose, 
shall at the same time apply to the Board for an effluent control permit. 
(2) A person who applies to take or who takes water for an industrial use or local  
authority use and who proposes to discharge or does discharge the effluent directly into a  
watercourse or into a ditch or conduit where the effluent will or may reach a watercourse 
without further treatment, shall apply to the Board for an effluent control permit. 
(3) Where a person applies to take or takes water for industrial use from a local  
authority which also removes effluent from the public generally, the local authority may  
refuse to supply or to continue to supply water to such person unless the person ensures by 
treatment or otherwise that the quality of the effluent meets such standards as the local author-
ity may require. 
Interdependence with a permit. 
63. 
The Board shall not issue a permit or amend an existing permit for the diversion, stor-
age, or use of water for an industrial purpose or use by a local authority unless it issues an 
effluent control permit at the same time. 
Application for an effluent control permit. 
64. 
(1) A person who applies for an effluent control permit or who applies to amend an 
existing effluent control permit shall comply with the regulations with respect to filing an 
application, giving notice of such application and paying the prescribed fee, if any, and shall 
furnish such information, plans and specifications as the Board may require. 
(2) The information to be provided to the Board shall include, but not be limited to — 
 
(a) the process or processes to be used to treat the effluent; 


--- PAGE 32 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.64-65 
 
 
32 
 
 
(b) the anticipated change in the temperature of the water, if any, and the methods 
and degree of cooling to be employed; 
 
(c) the chemical or biological constituents of the effluent both before and after 
treatment; 
 
(d) the method of locating and disposing of any substances removed in the treat-
ment process; 
 
(e) the estimated total daily and annual volumes of effluent to be discharged; 
 
(f) the rate or rates of discharge; 
 
(g) the location of the point of discharge and the nature of the receiving water; 
 
(h) the anticipated dispersion and dilution of the effluent; and 
 
(i) the nature of soils, vegetation, and depth to the water table in the proposed 
sludge disposal area or in the area of the discharge of the effluents to be dis-
charged onto or under land. 
Power of the Board on effluent control. 
65. 
(1) With respect to an application for an effluent control permit or for an amendment 
to an existing effluent control permit, the Board may — 
 
(a) refuse the application; 
 
(b) amend the application in any respect; 
 
(c) grant the application in whole or in part; 
 
(d) require additional information, plans, or specifications; or 
 
(e) issue to the applicant one or more effluent control permits on such terms and 
conditions as the Board considers proper. 
(2) Without limiting the discretion of the Board, an effluent control permit may con-
tain — 
 
(a) limitations as to the time or hours of day when the effluent may be dis-
charged; 
 
(b) limitations on the quantity of effluent to be discharged either generally or at 
specified times; 
- 
(c) the chemical or biological constituents and temperature of the effluent to be 
discharged; 
 
(d) methods of monitoring the receiving waters and of the effluent and the 
maintenance records; 
 
(e) the method of the disposal of any sludge and the location of such disposal 
area; 
 
(f) a requirement that the quality of - effluent be upgraded to higher standards 
over a period of time; 
 
(g) requirement that the permit holder prepare within a stated time a shut down 
plan for the approval of the Board which plan shall indicate the procedures to 
be followed upon a temporary shut down or a permanent closure of the under-
taking to ensure that there is no danger of continued pollution; or 


--- PAGE 33 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.65-67 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
33 
 
 
(h) a requirement that quarterly inspection reports of waste water quality data be 
submitted to the Board or at such other shorter period as the Board may pre-
scribe. 
(3) The Board shall enforce such effluent standards as shall be prescribed by the  
National Water Authority and be in conformity with standards prescribed by the Eswatini 
Environmental Authority. 
Cancellation of an effluent control permit. 
66. 
(1) Every effluent control permit and all rights or obligations under it may be can-
celled by the Board in whole or in part, if — 
 
(a) the permit holder has failed for three successive years to comply with the 
terms and conditions under the effluent control permit; 
 
(b) the permit holder has failed to complete the construction of the works author-
ised or required by the effluent control permit within the time specified by the 
effluent control permit; 
 
(c) the permit holder has failed for two successive years to pay any fees or charg-
es due to the Board with respect to the effluent control permit; 
 
(d) the permit holder has failed to comply with the Act and/or any regulations 
under the Act; 
 
(e) the permit holder has failed to comply with a lawful order of the Board or its 
duly authorised delegate; or 
 
(f) the permit holder made a material misstatement in the application for an  
effluent control permit or in information provided to the Board with respect to 
such application. 
(2) If the Board proposes to cancel an effluent control permit in whole or in part on 
any ground specified in subsection (1), it shall give notice by registered mail to the permit 
holder. 
(3) If the Board, within four weeks of the mailing of such notice, has received an objec-
tion to the proposed cancellation from the permit holder, the Board shall hold a hearing and shall 
then decide whether to cancel the effluent control permit in whole or in part or to allow the efflu-
ent control permit to remain in effect subject to such amended or additional terms and conditions 
as the Board may consider proper. 
(4) A cancellation or amendment of an effluent control permit shall not relieve the 
permit holder of any liability for past or continuing pollution. 
Suspension of an effluent control permit. 
67. 
(1) Whenever the Board is of the opinion that an emergency exists which poses a 
threat no the health or safety of persons or of the environment and which arises out of the  
operation of the permit and whether such emergency arises out of a fault of the permit holder 
or not, the Board may by order suspend an effluent control permit forthwith for such period as 
the Board considers necessary. 
(2) The permit holder shall immediately on receipt of the suspension order cease the 
discharge of the effluent and shall immediately take such steps as are necessary or as may be 
ordered by the Board, to overcome the emergency and, so far as may be possible, to avoid a 
repetition thereof. 


--- PAGE 34 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.67-70 
 
 
34 
 
(3) Before the permit holder is heard, he has to cease discharge of the effluent or other-
wise comply with the order of the Board. 
Special powers of the Minister. 
68. 
(1) Without limiting the general powers under this Act, the Minister may on the rec-
ommendation of the Authority, order such steps to be taken by such person or persons in a 
specified time as may be necessary, or as may appear to be necessary, to avoid any pollution, 
stop pollution from occurring or to clean up a polluted condition whether or not the person has 
been charged under this Act. 
(2) In carrying out his power under subsection (1), the Minister may — 
 
(a) suspend an effluent control permit; 
 
(b) stop or shut down any industrial undertaking or activity which is the source of 
pollution; 
 
(c) submit a plan to remedy the contravention; 
 
(d) minimise or remedy the adverse effects on the — 
 
(i) aquatic environment; 
 
(ii) human health, safety of property; 
 
(e) restore or reclaim an area satisfactory to the Minister; or 
 
(f) specify the period of time when the order must be complied with. 
(3) If such order of the Minister is not obeyed within the specified time, the Minister 
may out of revenues and funds of Eswatini take any steps to avoid the pollution or to clean up 
a polluted condition and may recover the costs in any court of competent jurisdiction from the 
person or persons who were ordered to perform the work or who caused the polluted condi-
tion. 
Transfer of effluent control permit. 
69. 
(1) The proprietor of an industrial undertaking for which an effluent control permit 
has been issued and who proposes to acquire this undertaking shall apply to the Board for the 
transfer of that permit, specifying in that application the identity of the person who proposes 
to acquire the undertaking. 
(2) The Board may approve the transfer upon such terms and conditions, if any, as the 
Board may consider appropriate. 
(3) In the alternative, the Board may refuse to consider such application until the  
applicant has taken such steps as the Board may consider necessary to clean up any polluted 
conditions or has given such security as the Board may require to guarantee such clean up. 
(4) Subject to subsections (2) and (3) the Board, upon receipt of evidence of the trans-
fer of the proprietorship and upon payment of the prescribed fee, if any, shall issue a new  
effluent control permit in the name of the new proprietor and shall cancel the prior effluent 
control permit. 
(5) The new effluent control permit may contain additional or different terms and 
conditions to the existing one. 
Exemption under repealed Act. 
70. 
The holder of an exemption order under the repealed Act shall apply for an effluent 
control permit within six months of the coming into force of this Act. 


--- PAGE 35 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.71-74 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
35 
 
PART IX 
WATER SPORT CONTROL ACCESS 
Establishment of water sport control areas. 
71. 
Upon the recommendation of the Authority, the Minister may, by notice published in 
the Gazette, establish an area defined in such notice to be a water sport control area. 
Regulations in respect of water sport control areas. 
72. 
(1) Upon the recommendation of the Authority, the Minister may make regulations in 
respect of a water sport control area. 
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the regulations may provide for: 
 
(a) the control over and the use of the area or parts thereof for navigation or for 
any sport which is practised upon or in water; 
 
(b) the control over and use of water craft and appliances of whatever nature  
upon or in the water in the area or parts thereof; 
 
(c) the control in the area or parts thereof of activities arising from or incidental 
to navigation or any water sport; 
 
(d) the use of the land between the boundaries of the area and the surface of the 
water for purposes arising from or incidental to navigation or any water sport; 
and 
 
(e) fees payable to the Board in respect of the use of the area or parts thereof for 
any activity arising from or incidental to navigation or any water sport. 
PART X 
IRRIGATION DISTRICTS AND WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS 
Establishment of Irrigation Districts. 
73. 
(1) The Minister may from time to time upon the recommendation of the Authority 
establish Irrigation Districts by notice in the Gazette. 
(2) The notice shall define the boundaries of the District and shall state a name by 
which the District shall be known. 
Irrigation District to be a body corporate. 
74. 
(1) Where two-thirds of the permitted users of water in an area petition the Authority 
to incorporate an Irrigation District, the Authority shall recommend to the Minister of this 
intended corporation. 
(2) Where the Minister agrees to the incorporation he shall then publish a notice in the 
Gazette of the intention to incorporate the Irrigation District. 
(3) Any person objecting to this incorporation shall lodge the grounds therefor to the 
Authority within 21 days of the publication of the notice. 
(4) The Authority shall thereafter consider any objection submitted to it and further 
recommend to the Minister who shall then decide on the incorporation. 


--- PAGE 36 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.74-76 
 
 
36 
 
(5) The notice of incorporation under subsection (2) shall provide — 
 
(a) the number of members of the board of directors, the term of office, which 
shall not be longer than three years, although retiring members may be eligible 
for re-election; 
 
(b) the definition of eligible electors in the Irrigation District and the method of 
establishing the list of eligible electors. Electors may have multiple voting 
rights proportioned to permitted water volumes or cultivated hectarage; 
 
(c) the definition for calculating the rateable value of lands in the Irrigation Dis-
trict for apportioning rates and charges; 
 
(d) the procedure for nominating and electing the first members of the board of 
directors and for subsequent elections; and 
 
(e) any objects, powers or duties in addition to those provided in section 75 as 
may seem to the Authority to be desirable and on advice from the Board. 
(6) Upon incorporation the Irrigation District shall be a body corporate capable of  
suing and being sued in its own name and shall be governed by a board of directors. 
Functions of an Irrigation District. 
75. 
(1) An Irrigation District shall exercise control over the operation and maintenance of 
works in the district and the distribution of permitted volumes of water in accordance with 
permits and for the benefit of persons in the district and such other functions as may be set out 
in the notice of incorporation. 
(2) Without derogating from subsection (1), the Irrigation District shall also — 
 
(a) exercise such powers of the Board with respect to the enforcement of permits 
or this Act as the Board may in writing delegate, including the power to  
appoint water bailiffs or inspectors; 
 
(b) take all reasonable steps to avoid the waste or misuse of water; 
 
(c) levy and collect rates and charges, subject to the approval of the Board, to 
defray the costs of the District; 
 
(d) maintain true accounts of its receipts and expenditures and to make them 
available for inspection by the Board and the electors; and 
 
(e) hold general meetings of eligible electors at least once per year and at such 
meetings disclose its accounts and a statement of its activities. 
(3) The board of directors may pass by-laws necessary to enable them to properly ful-
fil their obligations. 
Water Users Association. 
76. 
(1) The holders of permits appurtenant to land and undertakings in a defined area or 
of permits relating to water in a defined watercourse or river system or portions thereof may 
form an association with the object of maximising the benefits from such permits to members 
of the association and promoting the more efficient use of permitted water. 
(2) The permit holders shall obtain approval of the Board to form an association and 
shall provide information as the Board may require. 


--- PAGE 37 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.77-79 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
37 
 
Delegation of powers by the Board. 
77. 
(1) The Board may delegate by notice in writing to any Water User Association such 
powers of the Board as it deems appropriate and as are set out in the notice of delegation. 
(2) Such powers may include but are not limited to — 
 
(a) the power to pool some or all of the permits held by the members and to dis-
tribute the permitted water equitably and in accordance with the objectives of 
the association, provided the total quantities permitted by all the permits are 
not exceeded; 
 
(b) appointing water bailiffs with authority to enforce the terms of the permits or 
of the distribution under the pooled arrangements; 
 
(c) appointing inspectors with authority to enforce the provisions of this Act. 
Costs of Water User Association. 
78. 
All costs and expenses incurred by a Water User Association shall be borne by the 
members of the Association in such proportion as the members may agree. 
PART XI 
PROJECT BOARDS 
Establishment of project boards. 
79. 
(1) The Minister may from time to time, upon the recommendation of the Authority 
after consultation with the relevant River Basin Authority, establish project boards by notice 
in the Gazette. 
(2) A project board shall be established for new developments requiring new capital 
input or organisation. 
(3) The notice shall state a name for the project board and shall define its objects, 
powers and location within which it shall operate. 
(4) Upon establishment the project board shall be a body corporate capable of suing 
and being sued in its own name, and shall have such powers as a body corporate may have. 
(5) The management of a project board shall be elected by the relevant water users 
and shall hold office for a period not exceeding 3 years but shall be eligible for re-election. 
(6) Unless otherwise stated in the Gazette establishing the board, a board shall be  
responsible for regulation of its own affairs and procedures at meetings. 
(7) The notice of establishment shall set out the objects of the project board which 
shall include the construction and/or operation and/or distribution of water to permit holders 
and may include such other objects as may be recommended by the Authority. 
(8) The notice of establishment shall define the powers a board may exercise, which 
powers may include but not be limited to — 
 
(a) the power, with the consent of the Minister and the Minister of Finance, to 
borrow money; 
 
(b) the power to levy charges and assessments on the distribution of water to 
defray in whole or in part the capital, operation and maintenance costs  
incurred by the project board; 


--- PAGE 38 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.79-81 
 
 
38 
 
 
(c) such other powers as may be recommended by the Authority. 
(9) All charges and levies raised in accordance with subsection (8)(b) shall be specifi-
cally for the project concerned and shall be determined in conjunction with the affected stake-
holders to ensure and protect the long-term viability of the project. 
(10) The project board shall keep a separate account for all money received and its  
accounts shall be audited by an accredited accounting firm approved by the Authority. 
(11) A project board shall present an audited statement of account and a report of its 
activities to the Authority at least once during each year of the project activities. 
(12) The objects and powers of a project board may be altered, expanded or reduced 
from time to time by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board through the Authority 
by notice in the Gazette. 
PART XII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Special provisions relating to the Great Usuthu (Lusutfu) and Little Usuthu (Lusushwane) 
Rivers. 
80. 
(1) If at the request of the Electricity Board, the Board has issued a permit under the 
repealed Act to a person in the special area which contains conditions requiring periodic  
reductions in the quantity of permitted water, the permit issued under this Act shall contain the 
like provision. 
(2) If the Board reduces for a period the quantity of water which may be diverted, 
stored, or used under a permit referred to in subsection (1), the Board shall send a notice to the 
permit holder by registered post setting forth the period which such reduction shall be made 
and the nature of the reduction and shall, in such notice, direct the permit holder to take such 
steps as may be specified in the notice to give effect to such reduction. 
(3) The Electricity Board shall pay to any person who is ordered to reduce the quantity 
of water as provided in subsection (2) such compensation arising out of such reduction as may 
be agreed upon, or failing agreement, determined by the Authority. 
(4) For purposes of this section, “The Electricity Board” means the Board established 
under section 3 of the Electricity Act, 1963. 
(5) “Special area” means the area defined in the schedule in Notice No. 61 of 1964 
dated the nineteenth day of May 1964, and declared in that notice to be a special river control 
area in terms of section 18 of the Electricity Act, 1963. 
Alteration of watercourse. 
81. 
(1) A person shall not alter or divert a watercourse without a permit from the Board. 
(2) If a watercourse is diverted from its original channel by natural causes or other-
wise, the ownership of the lands on the banks of the original course and the boundaries of 
such lands shall not be affected. 
(3) If a watercourse is diverted by natural causes or otherwise and any works of a 
permit holder are thereby damaged or rendered of less or no effect, the permit holder shall 
apply to the Board for an amendment to the permit holder’s permit, or for a new permit to 
move the point of diversion or alter affected works, or both, so that the permit holder may 
obtain the full benefit of the permitted quantities of water. 


--- PAGE 39 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.81-84 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
39 
 
(4) Amendments made under subsection (3) may be for a stated temporary or perma-
nent period. 
Re-establishing original channel. 
82. 
If a watercourse has been diverted by natural causes, any holder of a permit whose 
point of diversion is downstream of the point of such natural diversion, may apply to the 
Board to return the watercourse to its original course. 
Temporary permit. 
83. 
(1) The Board may on the application of any person issue a temporary permit for the 
diversion, storage, or use of water which is of a temporary or non-recurring nature. 
(2) A temporary permit shall only authorise the diversion, storage, or use of water 
which is available after the requirement of all permit holders on the same watercourse have 
been met in full. 
(3) A temporary permit may be for any period or periods up to a maximum of three 
years but it shall not be renewable beyond three years. 
(4) A temporary permit shall not provide the holder with any preference or other right 
in an application for a permit. 
(5) A person applying to the Board for a temporary permit shall pay the same admin-
istrative fee, if any, and shall provide the Board with the same information as is required for 
an application for a permit and shall in addition satisfy the Board that the use is of a temporary 
or non-recurring nature. 
(6) The Eswatini Railway, as defined in section 2 of the Eswatini Railway Act, No. 
15 of 1962, may in an emergency for construction or maintenance purposes, apply for a tem-
porary permit to the Board without paying a fee or providing the full information required by 
subsection (5), and the Chairperson of the Board or any member may give authority in writing 
for the use of such water as has been requested, and the provisions of subsection (2) shall not 
apply. 
(7) If the exercise of the rights under a temporary permit by the Eswatini Railway 
causes damage or loss to any person holding a permit on the river or to any person lawfully 
using water from the watercourse, the Eswatini Railway shall pay such person or persons such 
compensation as may be agreed or, failing agreement, may be ordered by the Authority. 
Recording of permits on title deed land. 
84. 
(1) Whenever a permit has been issued under this Act for the diversion, storage or use 
of water on land described in such permit, the Board shall, by notice in writing, direct the 
Registrar of Deeds to note such permit on the title deed of that land. 
(2) If a permit noted in terms of subsection (1) is subsequently cancelled, withdrawn 
or substituted by any other permit issued by the Board in terms of the provisions of this Act, 
the Board shall, by notice in writing, notify the Registrar of Deeds of such cancellation, with-
drawal or substitution and the said Registrar shall thereupon make the necessary notes on the 
relevant title deed in accordance with the directions contained in such notice and in the man-
ner in which the original note was made. 
(3) The document conveying the direction or notice referred to in subsections (1) and 
(2) respectively, shall set forth — 
 
(a) a description of the land in question and the number and date of its title deed; 


--- PAGE 40 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.84-86 
 
 
40 
 
 
(b) the name of the proprietor of the land; 
 
(c) the number and date of the permit to be noted, cancelled, withdrawn or substi-
tuted, as the case may be, and, where applicable, shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the relevant permit duly certified by a person authorised thereto by 
the Board, and the Registrar of Deeds shall cause the said copy to be filed of 
record in the deeds office. 
(4) The Registrar of Deeds shall, upon receipt of any notice or permit and free of 
charge, make the necessary notes on the relevant title deeds and shall file the certified copy of 
such permit or notice as a document of record in the deeds office. 
Collection of fees and charges. 
85. 
(1) Where a fee or charge has been prescribed pursuant to a regulation, the Board 
shall be entitled to recover the amounts payable from — 
 
(a) the proprietors of the land in respect of which fees or charges have been  
assessed; or 
 
(b) the person entitled to use the water. 
(2) Fees or charges assessed in respect of water used on land shall be a charge upon 
the land in respect of which the fees or charges have been assessed, and any person who  
becomes the proprietor of any such land shall be liable for any such fees or charges which 
remain unpaid at the time when becoming the proprietor. 
(3) The Board may, in addition to any action it may take in terms of subsection (1) for 
the recovery of any fees or charges referred to therein and which have not been paid on due 
date, stop the supply of water from the works in question to the land in respect of which such 
water is supplied, or to the person who is being supplied with water, or suspend the permit in 
terms of which the water is being used, as the case may be, until the said fees or charges have 
been paid, and the Board shall not be obliged, after the amount due has been paid, to supply 
any water so stopped or to pay any compensation for any loss sustained by any person conse-
quent upon the stopping of the said supply of water or the suspension of the said permit. 
(4) Where fees or charges have been assessed as referred to in subsection (1) or (2) in 
respect of any land, the Board shall in writing advise the Registrar of Deeds accordingly, and 
thereupon no transfer of such land or any interest in such land shall be passed by the said Reg-
istrar until a certificate signed by a person authorised thereto by the Board has been produced 
stating all fees and charges assessed on such land have been paid. 
(5) A suspension of a permit or the supply of water under subsection (3) shall not  
relieve a person in respect of the period of such suspension, of any fees or charges assessed 
under this Act or regulations. 
Powers of inspectors. 
86. 
(1) Every inspector appointed under this Act shall be furnished with a certificate 
signed by the Director stating that the inspector has been designated as an inspector for the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) An inspector shall, on demand by any person affected by the exercise or the per-
formance of any power or function under this Act, exhibit the certificate referred to in subsec-
tion (1). 


--- PAGE 41 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
s.86 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
41 
 
(3) An inspector may, for the purposes of this Act — 
 
(a) without previous notice, at any time enter upon any land and at all reasonable 
times enter any premises, to ensure compliance with the Act and, after having 
informed the person who is for the time being in charge or control of such 
land or premises of the purpose of the visit if any such person can readily be 
found thereon, make such examination or inspection of any such land or 
premises; 
 
(b) take gaugings or readings of any water contained in or flowing in any works 
or which is being used to irrigate any area, as the inspector may deem neces-
sary; 
 
(c) at any reasonable time, while the inspector is upon the land or upon or in any 
premises or otherwise, question any person — 
 
(i) who uses or intends to use water on the said land; or 
 
(ii) who has constructed, supplied or is constructing any works or sup-
plying any component thereof in connection with such use; 
 
(iii) who is an employee of a person mentioned in subparagraph (ii) in 
the presence of or apart from others; or 
 
(iv) who discharges effluent; 
 
(d) require from any person or employee the production then and there, or at a 
time and place fixed by the inspector, of any book, list, record, notice, data 
print outs, or other document which is or has been upon or in the premises or 
in the possession or custody or under the control of such person or employee 
if, in the inspector’s opinion, examination of that book, list, record, notice or 
document is necessary for the purpose of the inspection; 
 
(e) examine and make extracts from and copies of any such books, list, record, 
notice, print out or document, and require from such person or employee an 
explanation of any entries in any such book, list, record, notice or document, 
and seize any such book, list, record, notice or document if the inspector  
believes on reasonable grounds that an offence has been committed; 
 
(f) take samples of any substance or thing or effluent; 
 
(g) conduct tests or take measurements; 
 
(h) initiate any actions which are reasonable for carrying out an inspection. 
(4) For the purposes of carrying out an investigation under this Act, an inspector may — 
 
(a) enter any premises or gain access to any place, except for a private dwelling, 
where the investigator has reasonable grounds to believe that an offence has 
been committed under this Act and there is in place something that may be 
evidence as to the commission of an offence; 
 
(b) seize anything the investigator believes, on reasonable grounds, may provide 
evidence of the commission of an offence under this Act. 
(5) A person or employee referred to in subsections (3) or (4) shall at all times pro-
vide such reasonable facilities as are required by an inspector for the purpose of exercising the 
powers under this section or Act. 


--- PAGE 42 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
ss.86-88 
 
 
42 
 
(6) A person who — 
 
(a) hinders or obstructs an inspector in exercising powers or the performance of 
duties; or 
 
(b) without valid excuse, refuses or fails to answer to the satisfaction of the  
inspector any questions which an inspector has put to that person; or 
 
(c) refuses or fails to comply with any reasonable requirement of an inspector in 
the exercise of powers or performance of his duties under this paragraph; or 
 
(d) wilfully furnishes to an inspector any information which he reasonably knows 
to be false or misleading, 
shall be guilty of an offence. 
Liability for damage. 
87. 
Every holder of a permit, a temporary permit or an effluent control permit, or a person 
who uses water without such a permit, shall take reasonable care to avoid causing damage to 
land, works, undertakings, crops, trees, or other property and shall make full compensation to 
the owner for any damage or loss resulting from the construction, operation or maintenance of 
the holder’s works or from the use of the water without a permit. 
Right of entry into land. 
88. 
(1) Any person authorised thereto in writing by the Director or the Board may, after 
reasonable notice to the proprietor or occupier of any land, enter upon such land with such 
men, animals, vehicles, appliances and instruments and do all such acts thereon as may be 
necessary for the purpose of making any inquiries or undertaking any investigations with a 
view to determine the feasibility of constructing, enlarging, extending construction camps or 
other preliminary work which the Director or the Board may consider necessary in connection 
with any such work, or for the purpose of ascertaining whether any provision of this Act or 
any regulation made or condition imposed thereunder has been contravened: 
Provided that a person shall not enter upon any land, building, or an enclosed space  
attached to a dwelling except with the consent of the occupier of that building or dwelling: 
Provided further, that in the exercise of any power of entry under this subsection, as little 
damage as possible shall be caused on the building or enclosed space. 
(2) The person making an entry under subsection (1) shall repair any damage caused 
or pay such compensation for any damage caused as may be agreed upon with the occupier, or 
failing such agreement, determined by the Authority. 
(3) A member of the Authority or of the Board or a person authorised thereto in writ-
ing by the chairperson of the Authority, or authorised person or Board, may enter upon any 
land for the purpose of making any inspection or carrying out any duty which the member of 
the Authority or Board or person authorized may consider necessary in connection with the 
performance of any functions under this Act. 
(4) A person who prevents any entry or the exercise of any power authorised by this 
section or wilfully obstructs or hinders any person so entering in carrying out such person’s 
powers or duties under this Act, shall be guilty of an offence and liable, on conviction, to the 
penalties prescribed in section 90. 


--- PAGE 43 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.89-90 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
43 
 
Service of notices and documents. 
89. 
(1) Any notice, order or other document required by this Act to be served upon any 
person shall be deemed to have been duly served if it has been — 
 
(a) delivered to such person personally; or 
 
(b) where personal service is not possible, left at or sent by registered post to the 
person’s last known ordinary residence published in the Gazette and news-
papers circulating in the area. 
(2) Any notice, order or other document required to be served under this Act upon the 
Authority, the Board or an Irrigation District or Project Board, shall be deemed to have been 
duly served if it has been delivered or left at or sent by registered post to the office of the  
Authority, the Board, or Irrigation District as the case may be or, in the case of an Irrigation 
District only, to the last known ordinary residence of the chairperson or the secretary of that 
Irrigation District. 
(3) Any notice, order or other document which, purporting to be lawfully made, is  
issued in good faith under this Act, shall be valid, according to the terms thereof, notwith-
standing any want of form or lack of authority on the part of any person to issue or authenti-
cate it if the authority is subsequently conferred upon such person. 
Offences and penalties. 
90. 
(1) A person, unless that person has the lawful right or authority, the proof whereof 
shall lie upon that person, who — 
 
(a) constructs, alters, enlarges or obstructs works or destroys, defaces or moves 
any level mark, beacon or other structure or appliance erected or made in 
connection with any work; or 
 
(b) interferes with or alters the flow of the water contained in or flowing in or 
from works or interferes with or alters the flow of the water of a watercourse, 
or interferes with the distribution of any such water, or takes water, including 
groundwater, in excess of the quantity entitled to the person, or when the per-
son is not entitled to do so, or uses water in a manner contrary to this Act; or 
 
(c) while using or being liable for the maintenance of works, wastes or does not 
take due precaution to prevent waste of water from any such works, or fails to 
maintain the works and keep it in good repair; or 
 
(d) being a proprietor of land in respect of which fees or charges have been  
assessed, takes or uses water from the works in connection with which such 
fees or charges have been assessed, after the supply of water from such works 
to his land has been stopped by the Board or, as the case may be, by the Irriga-
tion District concerned, or takes or uses water after the Board has suspended the 
permit in terms of which the water may be used, by reason of a default on the 
part of the proprietor; or 
 
(e) obstructs an inspector in the exercise of the duties of the inspector under this 
Act; or 
 
(f) wastes water; or 
 
(g) aids or abets or permits any act or default referred to in any of the preceding 
paragraphs; or 


--- PAGE 44 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
s.90 
 
 
44 
 
 
(h) falsifies any records required to be kept under the Act or mixes substances 
which will change the nature of any samples required to be kept under this 
Act; or 
 
(i) contravenes or permits the contravention of or fails to comply with any provi-
sion of this Act or with any condition imposed in any permit, ground-water 
permit, borehole drilling permit, or effluent control permit issued by the 
Board under this Act, 
shall be guilty of an offence and liable, in the case of a first conviction, to a fine not exceeding 
five thousand Emalangeni or imprisonment not exceeding five months or both, and, in the 
case of a second or subsequent conviction, a fine not exceeding ten thousand Emalangeni or 
imprisonment not exceeding then months or both. 
(2) Any person who causes or permits any water to become polluted shall be guilty of 
offence and liable, in the case of a first conviction, to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand  
Emalangeni or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both, and in the case of a second or 
subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand Emalangeni or impris-
onment not exceeding ten years or both. 
(3) In a prosecution under this section — 
 
(a) the owner or lessee or occupier of any land or an agent or servant of the owner, 
lessee or occupier; 
 
(b) the owner, operator, manager, employee or person responsible for any works 
or industrial undertaking, 
may be charged with an offence under this Act. 
(4) If a corporation commits an offence under this Act, any officer, director or agent 
of the corporation who directed, authorised or acquiesced in or participated in committing that 
offence, is guilty of the offence and liable to the punishment for the offence whether or not the 
corporation has been prosecuted for or convicted of that offence. 
(5) A person who contravenes any provision of this Act for which no penalty is  
expressly provided shall be liable, on conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand Emal-
angeni or imprisonment not exceeding one month, or both. 
(6) Any regulations made by the Minister under this Act may impose penalties, not 
exceeding the penalties referred to in subsections (1) or (2) for an offence against such regula-
tion. 
(7) A person who has been convicted of any offence under this Act, and who after 
such conviction persists in the course of conduct which constituted the said offence, shall be 
guilty of a continuing offence and liable, on conviction — 
 
(a) in the case of an offence- referred to in subsection (2), to a fine not exceeding 
one thousand Emalangeni; or 
 
(b) in the case of any other offence, to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty 
Emalangeni, in respect of every day that the person so persists or has so per-
sisted or as may be recommended in the effluent control regulations. 
(8) If in any proceedings under subsection (1) it is alleged that a person has — 
 
(a) interfered with the distribution of water contained or flowing in or from a 
works or a watercourse, or has taken more water than the person is entitled to 
take, and it is proved that the said distribution was interfered with or that 


--- PAGE 45 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.90-93 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
45 
 
 
 
more water was taken than the said person was entitled to, or that the said 
water was taken at a time when such person was not entitled to take it, the 
said person shall be presumed, until the contrary is proven, to have taken 
more water than the person was entitled to or to have taken it at a time when 
the person was not entitled to take it; 
 
(b) taken water at a time when that person was not entitled to take such water, it 
is proved that such water was running onto or found on any land or running 
into or found in any dam belonging to that person, the onus of proving that 
the person was entitled to such water or that it was so taken or used without 
that person’s knowledge, shall be upon that person. 
Award of damages in criminal proceedings. 
91. 
(1) Whenever any person is convicted of an offence under this Act and it appears that 
such person has by that offence caused loss or damage to any Irrigation District, Project 
Board, Board, Authority, Water Users Association or proprietor concerned as the case may be, 
the court any in the same proceedings at the written request of the Irrigation District, Board, 
Water Users Association or proprietor concerned, as the case may be, and in the- presence of 
the convicted person, enquire summarily and without pleadings into the amount of the loss or 
damage so caused. 
(2) Upon proof of such amount, the court shall give judgment therefor against the 
convicted person in favour of the Irrigation District, Board or Authority, Water Users Asso-
ciation or proprietor concerned, as the case may be, and such judgment shall be of the same 
force and effect and be executable in the same manner as if it had been given in a civil action 
duly instituted before such court. 
(3) A judgment shall not be given under this section for a sum exceeding two thou-
sand Emalangeni. 
Evidence. 
92. 
(1) A copy of the minutes of the proceedings of any meeting of the Authority or the 
Board or an Irrigation District or a committee of the Authority or the Board or such Irrigation 
District, purporting to be signed by the chairperson of that meeting, and certified under the 
hand of the chairperson for the time being of the Authority or Board or Irrigation District, or 
committee, as a correct copy of the minutes of that meeting, shall be prima facie evidence in 
all courts of the proceedings of that meeting. 
(2) Until the contrary is proved, every such meeting of the proceedings of which 
minutes have been so signed and certified, shall be deemed to have been truly convened and 
held. 
Transitional provisions. 
93. 
(1) The title of the Government in any works or in lands used in connection with any 
works obtained or held under any provision in the repealed Act shall continue under the provi-
sion of this Act. 
(2) Any agreement of any kind entered into by the Government or the Minister on be-
half of the Government with any person for the operation or maintenance of any works, may 
be transferred by the Government or the Minister to the Authority as agent of the Government, 
and the Authority or its duly appointed delegate may thereafter exercise all the rights and shall 
be liable for all the obligations of the Government or the Minster under such agreement. 


--- PAGE 46 ---

STATUTES OF ESWATINI 
s.93 
 
 
46 
 
(3) Any claim by the Government or the Minister against any person or any claim by 
a person against the Government or the Minister arising out of a provision in the repealed Act 
which has not been finally settled when this Act comes into force, shall be finally settled  
under the provisions of the repealed Act as if the repealed Act had not been repealed. 
(4) The liability of any person for unpaid charges, assessments, loans or similar mat-
ters shall continue notwithstanding the r-peal of the repealed Act and the Authority or agent of 
the Government or the Minister may recover the same under the provisions of the repealed 
Act. 
(5) All regulations made pursuant to the provisions of the repealed Act shall, in so far 
as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remain in full force and effect. 
(6) All servitudes granted or continued by the provisions of the repealed Act shall  
remain in full force and effect so long as they are not inconsistent with this Act. 
(7) All orders, directions, permits, apportionment, exemptions, or permits made or  
issued under the repealed Act and all powers delegated or authorisations given to inspectors 
under the repealed Act and which are valid and subsisting at the date this Act comes into 
force, shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remain in full 
force and effect. 
(8) Any application to the Board for a hearing or for reconsideration of any decision, 
or any application to a water court which has been duly filed prior to the coming into force of 
this Act, shall be continued under the provisions of the repealed Act until all appeal processes 
have been exhausted or abandoned. 
(9) A person who at the coming into force of this Act, was lawfully diverting, storing, 
or using water from a watercourse pursuant to a permit or apportionment under the repealed 
Act, or under the provisions of the Mining Act, No. 5, 1958, or pursuant to the exercise of a 
legal right, may continue to divert, store or use such water provided the person makes applica-
tion to the Board in the proper form for a permit under this Act to diver, store, or use the same 
flow rate subject to an annual volume as may be determined by the Board within two years of 
this Act coming into force, or within such longer period as the Minister may by notice in the 
Gazette allow. 
(10) Upon receipt of an application in the proper form, the Board shall within one hun-
dred and twenty days and on payment of the prescribed fee, if any, issue a permit or permits 
under this Act authorising the applicant to divert, store, or use the same flow rate of water as 
previously allowed subject to an annual volume as may be determined by the Board. 
(11) Such permit or permits may contain such terms and conditions as the Board may 
deem appropriate under the provisions of this Act including, but without limitation, the  
requirement that the permit holder installs and maintains measuring devices to record the rate 
of flow and volume of water diverted or used. 
(12) Upon the issue of a permit or permits under this Act, all the former rights of the 
holder to divert, store, or use water from a watercourse, shall be merged into the rights granted 
to a permit holder under the provisions of this Act, and such person shall have no right to  
divert, store, or use any water from a watercourse except as provided in such permit or permits. 
(13) If a person referred to in subsection (9) does not make application to the Board in 
proper form for a permit under this Act within the time provided in subsection (9), that person 
shall forthwith cease to have any right to divert, store, or use any water. 


--- PAGE 47 ---

NATURAL RESOURCES: ACT 7/2003 
ss.93-95 
 
[ISSUE 1] 
47 
 
(14) The Board appointed under the repealed Act shall continue in office for a period 
of six months after the enactment of this Act. 
Power to make Regulations. 
94. 
(1) The Minister, after consultation with the Authority, may make Regulations for 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), the Regulations may provide for— 
 
(a) the procedure for making applications and giving notice thereof; 
 
(b) the information to be submitted with applications; 
 
(c) requiring applicants to pay administrative fees on the making of applications 
and prescribing the amount of such fees; 
 
(d) prescribing time periods for the renewal of any permit; 
 
(e) the practice and procedures for hearings by the Board; 
 
(f) the practice and procedures for hearing appeals by the Authority; 
 
(g) requiring applicants or appellants to pay administrative fees for a hearing 
before the Board or for an appeal to the Authority and prescribing the amount 
of such fees; 
 
(h) prescribing water quality objectives; 
 
(i) establishing a charge for the use of water; 
 
(j) prescribing procedures for securing closed wells; 
 
(k) delineating different categories of dams and establishing safety criteria for the 
construction, maintenance and operation of each category; 
 
(l) establishing guidelines for drilling boreholes; 
 
(m) the establishment of Basin Authorities; 
 
(n) prescribing time limits for renewal of permits; 
 
(o) the incorporation and management of Irrigation Districts and Project Boards; 
 
(p) the setting of fees and prescribing the amount of fees to be paid by the users 
of government works to contribute to the capital, operation and maintenance 
costs of such works. 
Repeal. 
95. The Water Act, 1967, is repealed. 
 


--- PAGE 48 ---

 
 
 
