THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
FEDERAL NEGARIT GAZETA
OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA

6th Year No. 25 ADDIS ABABA - 9th March, 2000
CONTENTS Proclamation No. 197/2000 Ethiopian Water Resources Management Proclamation

PROCLAMATION NO. 197/2000
A PROCLAMATION ON ETHIOPIAN WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

WHEREAS, it has become necessary to issue a water resources protection, utilization, and management Proclamation to ensure that Ethiopia's water resources are conserved and properly managed for the highest social and economic benefit of its people;

NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:

PART ONE
GENERAL PROVISIONS

1. Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the "Ethiopian Water Resources Management Proclamation No. 197/2000."

2. Definitions
Unless the context requires otherwise, in this Proclamation:

"Depletion of water" means a decrease in the quantity of water below its normal level at a given season, whether due to man-made or natural causes.

"Domestic use" means the use of water for drinking, cooking, sanitation, or other domestic purposes.

"Force majeure" means as defined in the Civil Code of Ethiopia.

"Groundwater" means water existing beneath the surface of the ground.

"Surface water" means static or flowing water on the surface of the ground.

"Water resource" means surface or ground water; however, it does not include mineral water and geothermal deposits as provided for under the Mining Proclamation No. 52/1993.

"Supervising body" means the Ministry, where it pertains to central water resources, or any entity delegated by the Ministry pursuant to Article 8(2) of this Proclamation.

"Public Authority" means any organ of the Federal Government, a Regional Government, the Addis Ababa City Administration, or the Dire Dawa Administration.

"Traditional irrigation" means peasant-managed irrigation that supplies water to land at a maximum rate of one liter per second (1 l/s) or for the cultivation of not more than one hectare of land per peasant for subsistence use.

"Waste" means any harmful matter introduced, released, or discharged into any water body in any solid, liquid, or gaseous form.

"Polluted water" means sewage and industrial effluent, including toxic water.

"Water Pollution" means harm caused as a result of the contamination of water by organic or inorganic matter, or as a result of a change in the temperature of the water.

"Water quality" means the description of the characteristics of water as defined by its physical, chemical, microbiological, bacteriological, and radiological parameters.

"Water quality standards" means the determination of quality by identifying the required and permissible quality levels regarding the parameters stated in sub-article 13 above.

"Basin" means a geographical area, described by the watershed limits of a water system, including surface and underground water flowing into a common terminus.

"Bank of a water body" means the area where land and any water body meet, the boundary and/or distance of which is determined by the Supervising body and the relevant Public Authority.

"Watercourse" means a natural or man-made river, stream, canal, or any waterway through which water flows at all times or part of the time.

"Water works" means any man-made work constructed or to be constructed for the purpose of putting water to beneficial use, and includes diversion, damming, drilling or boring, clearing, investigation, regulation, purification, measurement, transportation, transmission, desalination, dike construction, and other related and similar works.

"Water resource management" means activities that include water resources development, utilization, conservation, protection, and control.

"Ministry" or "Minister" means the Ministry of Water Resources or the Minister of Water Resources, respectively.

"Person" means any natural or juridical person.

"Servitude" shall have the meaning given in Article 1359 of the Ethiopian Civil Code.

3. Purpose
The purpose of this Proclamation is to ensure that the country's water resources are properly protected and utilized for the highest social and economic benefits of the people of Ethiopia, to follow up and supervise their proper conservation, to prevent the harmful effects of water, and to ensure that the overall management of water resources is carried out properly.

4. Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall apply to the management of any water resources existing within Ethiopia.

5. Public Ownership of Water Resources
All water resources of the country are the common property of the Ethiopian people and the state.

6. Fundamental Principles

The integrated Basin Master Plan Studies and the water resources legal framework shall serve as the basis for and ensure that any water resource is put to the highest social and economic benefit for all people of Ethiopia.

The social and economic development programs, investment plans, and water resources development activities of any person shall be based on and adhere to the country's Water Resources Policy, the relevant Basin Master Plan Studies, and water resources laws.

The Supervising body shall ensure and administer that any water resource is put to the highest social and economic benefit of the Ethiopian people, in accordance with the Ethiopian Water Resources Policy, Basin Master Plan Studies, and water resources laws.

The management of Ethiopia's water resources shall be based on a permit system.

7. Preference Among Uses

Domestic use shall have priority over and above any other water use.

Without prejudice to the provisions of Sub-Article (1) of this Article, the prior allocation of a water resource to a given purpose, or its being planned for such, shall not grant it priority over and above any other uses.

PART TWO
THE SUPERVISING BODY

8. Powers and Duties of the Supervising Body

The Supervising body shall be responsible for the planning, management, utilization, and protection of water resources. It shall also have the necessary power to execute its duties under the provisions of this Proclamation. Without limiting the generality of the above statement, the Supervising body shall have the following powers and duties:
a) issue permits and certificates of Professional Competence;
b) ensure that studies relating to water resources development, protection, utilization, and control have been carried out;
c) determine the allocation and manner of use of water resources among various uses and users;
d) require the submission of plans and proposals from any person who applies for a permit to undertake any kind of water works, and approve, reject, or amend such plans and proposals;
e) establish quality standards for surveys, designs, and specifications of waterworks, as well as standards for the construction of waterworks necessary for the development of water resources; it shall also supervise the compliance of water works with the established standards;
f) prepare directives, in consultation with concerned public bodies, to ensure that water resources are not polluted and do not pose a hazard to health and the environment;
g) issue directives pertaining to the safety of hydraulic structures for the prevention of damages caused by dam water to the dams themselves, persons, property, and crops;
h) cause, in consultation with the concerned public bodies, the issuance of quality or health standards that enable it to entertain an application for a permit to discharge or release polluted water into water resources;
i) issue an order for the rectification or suspension of waterworks that are incompatible or inconsistent with the Ethiopian water resources policy, relevant Basin Master Plan Studies, and water resources legal framework, and ensure its implementation;
j) issue directives regarding water use restrictions in a situation of water shortage emergency, and supervise the implementation of the same.

The Supervising body may, where necessary, delegate its powers and duties to the appropriate body for the efficient execution of its duties.

9. Settlement of Disputes

The Supervising body may, in accordance with procedures to be laid down in regulations issued pursuant to this proclamation, examine and decide disputes between permit holders, as well as between a permit holder and a third party, concerning rights or obligations arising from permits. The Supervising body shall also have the power to determine and execute compensation to be paid by one party to the other.

A party aggrieved by the decision of the Supervising body, pursuant to Sub-Article (1) of this Article, may appeal to the court of competent jurisdiction within 60 days following receipt of the decision; provided, however, that no such appeal shall be admitted after the expiry of the 60 days.

Any dispute, controversy, or claim between the Supervising body and the permit holder arising from reasons related to the permit shall, to the extent possible, be resolved through negotiation.

In the event that an agreement cannot be reached through negotiation, pursuant to Sub-Article (3) of this Article, the case shall be settled by arbitration. The details shall be determined by the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this proclamation.

PART THREE
INVENTORY OF WATER RESOURCES AND REGISTRY OF ACTIONS

10. Inventory of Water Resources and Registry of Actions

Being responsible for ensuring adequate knowledge of the water resources available for beneficial use, the Supervising body shall prepare or cause to be prepared, and shall maintain, an inventory of the country's water resources. The inventory shall include:
a) identification and description of the occurrence, availability, location, amount, and quality of water resources at any significant point in time of a year;
b) identification and description of seasonally expected demands for the supply of water;
c) periodically compiled data on consumptive and non-consumptive use of water.

The Supervising body shall establish and maintain, at all levels, registers of all actions taken with respect to applications pertaining to water use, discharge or release of waste into water resources, and construction of waterworks. The Register shall include such other information as may be required by directives issued by the Ministry pursuant to this Proclamation.

In order to maintain a central inventory of all water resources of the country and to ensure their proper utilization, all appropriate public bodies shall provide information to the Ministry, as it may determine, regarding the inventory and actions taken with respect to the utilization of water resources in their respective regions.

The information stated in Sub-Article (3) of this Article shall become an integral part of the Water Resources Information Center maintained by the Ministry.

PART FOUR
PERMITS AND PROFESSIONAL LICENSES

11. Necessity of Permits

Without prejudice to the exceptions specified under Article 12 of this Proclamation, no person shall perform the following activities without having obtained a permit from the Supervising body:
a) construct waterworks;
b) supply water, whether for his own use or for others;
c) transfer water which he/she abstracted from a water resource or received from another supplier; and
d) release or discharge waste into water resources, unless otherwise provided for in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

Any person shall be required to discuss his/her proposal with the supervising body prior to applying for a permit for the purposes specified in Sub-Article (1) of this Article. The details shall be determined by regulations.

12. Types of Water Uses Not Requiring a Permit

Any person may utilize water resources for the following purposes without holding a permit issued by the Supervising body:
a) digging water wells by hand or using water from hand-dug wells;
b) using water for traditional irrigation, artisanal mining, and traditional animal rearing, as well as for water mills.

The Supervising body may, where necessary, issue directives to prevent inappropriate use and wastage of water regarding the uses mentioned in Sub-Articles (1)(a) and (b) of this Article.

13. Application for a Permit

An application for a permit for water use, release or discharge of waste, or waterworks construction shall be submitted to the supervising body. The application shall include detailed information as may be specified in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

Any application for a permit to release or discharge any waste that endangers human life, animals, plants, and any living things into water resources shall not be accepted. However, the Supervising body may accept the application after requiring the applicant to release or discharge the pollutant after having treated it. The details shall be determined by directives to be issued by the Ministry.

14. Issuance of Permits

Without prejudice to the provisions of Sub-Article (3) of Article 15 of this Proclamation, the Supervising body shall issue the permit applied for in accordance with Article 13, within sixty (60) days after receipt of the application, where the proposed use of water does not:
a) infringe, in any manner, upon any person's legitimate right to use the water;
b) entail pollution or harmful effects on the water resource and the environment.

The Supervising body shall state in the permit form the detailed information, conditions, and restrictions that must be included. The details shall be determined by regulations to be issued for the implementation of this proclamation.

Where the Supervising body rejects an application for the reasons mentioned in Sub-Article (1) of this Article, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the rejection and the reasons thereof, within the time limit specified in Sub-Article (1) of this Article.

15. Duration and Renewal of a Permit

The duration of a permit issued as per Article 14 of this proclamation and the appropriate time limit for its renewal shall be determined by the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The Supervising body shall renew the permit, having ascertained that the permit holder has observed the conditions, obligations, and restrictions mentioned in his/her permit, as well as in this proclamation and the regulations issued thereunder.

A permit shall be presumed to have been cancelled if it is not renewed within the time limit to be determined pursuant to Sub-Article (1) of this Article.

16. Amendment and Transfer of a Permit

The permit holder may apply for a decrease or an increase in the quantity of water permitted or to be allowed to use the water for other beneficial uses.

When the application mentioned in Sub-Article (1) of this Article is submitted to it, the Supervising body shall decide thereon within ten (10) days.

The Supervising body may amend a permit on account of a change in environmental conditions, an increase in the demand for water, or where an adjustment of water allocation becomes necessary on any other satisfactory grounds, by giving sixty (60) days prior written notice to the holder; provided, however, that compensation shall be payable to the permit holder in accordance with the civil code for damages he incurred as a result of the amendment, except where the amendment is made due to the occurrence of natural changes in the environment.

A water resource use permit may be legally transferred to another person at the request of the permit holder and upon approval by the Supervising body.

17. Revocation or Suspension of a Permit
The Supervising body may, at any time, suspend or revoke a permit in whole or in part where the holder fails to observe or fulfill his/her obligations. The details shall be determined by the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this proclamation.

18. Grievances

Applications relating to the following matters shall, in the first instance, be submitted to the Supervising body for a decision:
a) to use a water resource, or to discharge or release waste into a water resource; or
b) to undertake the construction of water works; or
c) to amend or transfer a permit issued under Sub-Articles (1)(a) and (b) of this Article; or
d) seeking a decision on a dispute arising from water use between persons who have legal rights to use such a water resource.

The Supervising body shall give an appropriate decision on an application submitted to it in accordance with this proclamation and regulations to be issued for its implementation, and shall take the necessary measures thereof.

Any party aggrieved by the decision or measures taken by the Supervising body on matters specified in Sub-Article (1) of this Article may appeal to the competent court of law within sixty (60) days from the date on which the decision was given.

19. Certificate of Professional Competence
No person shall engage, whether for commercial purposes or otherwise, without holding a Certificate of Professional Competence issued by the Supervising body, in the field of waterworks construction activity pertaining to surface water, water well drilling, or cleaning activity, or in providing a consultancy service relating thereto. The details shall be determined by the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

PART FIVE
FEES AND WATER CHARGES

20. Service Fees

Fees shall be paid for permits pertaining to the following:
a) to get a permit for waterworks construction;
b) to get a permit for water use;
c) to get a permit to release or discharge waste into water resources;
d) to get any permit relating to water, to renew or amend, or to transfer a permit to another person.

Any person shall pay a service fee to get a Certificate of Professional Competence or to have it renewed or amended.

The amount of the service fee shall be as specified in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The Supervising body is hereby authorized to collect the service fee determined pursuant to the provisions of Sub-Articles (1)-(3) of this Article.

The Supervising body may exempt certain services of public utility from the payment of a service fee, as may be specified in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

21. Water Charges

A water charge shall be paid to use water resources for any use allowed under this Proclamation. The amount of the water charge shall be as may be specified in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The Supervising body is authorized to collect the water charge determined under Sub-Article (1) of this Article.

The Supervising body may exempt certain persons from the payment of the water charge, as may be specified in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

22. Charges for the Release or Discharge of Wastes into Water Resources

Charges shall be paid by permit holders for the discharge or release of waste into water resources. The amount of the charge shall be determined by the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The Supervising body is hereby authorized to collect the charge determined pursuant to the regulations.

PART SIX
SERVITUDE

23. Servitude

All servitude and rights of way required for the implementation and enforcement of all permitted waterworks shall be obligatory on possessors of land.

The conditions upon which the servitude is established shall be determined by regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The right of servitude shall be acquired only under conditions approved by the Supervising body on the basis of the regulations.

Any person who acquires a servitude shall not alter or modify the conditions laid down by the Supervising body upon which the servitude has been based.

The possessor of the land encumbered pursuant to Sub-Article (1) of this Article is entitled to adequate compensation from the beneficiary of the servitude.

24. Termination of Servitude
The right of servitude shall be terminated on the following grounds:

Servitude shall be terminated when the possessor of the encumbered land demonstrates to the Supervising body that the servitude has not been exercised by the beneficiary of the servitude, or his successor-in-title, or the person replacing him, within the time limit specified in the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this proclamation.

The provisions of Sub-Article (1) of this Article shall not apply where the beneficiary of the servitude demonstrates to the Supervising body that his failure to exercise the right of servitude is due to causes of force majeure.

PART SEVEN
WATER BANKS AND HARMFUL EFFECTS OF WATER

25. Protection of Banks of Water Bodies
The Supervising body, in collaboration and in consultation with the appropriate public body, may:

delimit the boundaries of the banks of certain water bodies;

prohibit the clearing or cutting of vegetation or trees and the construction of residential houses within the delimited banks of water bodies. The details shall be determined pursuant to directives to be issued by the Ministry.

26. Control of Harmful Effects of Water
The appropriate public bodies shall, before allowing or causing the founding of towns or villages, request the Supervising body for technical advice in order to prevent or avoid damages, adverse impacts, or accidents which may occur as a result of floods and other factors related to water.

PART EIGHT
ASSOCIATION OF WATER USERS

27. Organization

The Supervising body may, in consultation with the appropriate public bodies, encourage the establishment of water users' associations, as it deems necessary to utilize water for beneficial uses.

Without prejudice to the provisions of Sub-Article (1) of this Article, associations of water users may be established upon the initiation and volition of the users.

The details of the organization of a water users' association shall be pursuant to regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The relevant provisions of the Civil Code regarding the formation of such associations shall apply.

PART NINE
TRANSITORY PROVISIONS

28. Transitory Provisions

Any person who, before the coming into force of this Proclamation, with a permit issued by any public body or without such a permit:
a) has carried out or is carrying out waterworks construction;
b) is utilizing a water resource for himself or is supplying water to other persons;
c) is releasing or discharging waste into water resources;
shall apply to the supervising body for a permit, within 12 months from the coming into force of regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation, to be able to continue the water works, use the water, or discharge waste into the water body.

The prerequisite conditions to be fulfilled and the information required to be given by the applicant who applies for a permit pursuant to Sub-Article (1) of this Article, and for the purposes specified thereunder, shall be as determined by the regulations to be issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

A water resource user who fails to apply within the time limit mentioned in Sub-Article (1) of this Article may apply within the next 60 days upon a penalty payment of 50% over and above the normal permit fee.

If the user fails to apply pursuant to the provisions of Sub-Articles (1) or (3) of this Article, the supervising body may revoke the user's right to use the water resource.

The Supervising body shall, when the application is submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of Sub-Articles (1) or (3) of this Article, issue the requested permit within 60 days, provided that the request does not explicitly contradict the provisions of this Proclamation or the regulations issued thereunder; or if the request contradicts the provisions of this Proclamation or the regulations issued thereunder, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the rejection, including the reasons therefor, within the time limit specified in this sub-article.

Any person who, holding a Certificate of Professional Competence issued to him by any public body before the coming into force of this Proclamation, is engaged in any of the activities mentioned in Article 19 of this Proclamation, shall register with the supervising body and hold a Certificate of Professional Competence within 60 days as of the effective date of the regulations issued for the implementation of this Proclamation.

The prerequisite to be fulfilled and the information required to be given by the applicant for the issuance of the Certificate of Professional Competence pursuant to Sub-Article (6) of this Article shall be as may be determined by regulations to be issued for the implementation of this proclamation.

The provisions of Sub-Article (4) of this Article shall apply to a person who fails to apply within the time limit specified in Sub-Article (6) of this Article.

If a person fails to apply within the time limit specified in Sub-Article (6) of this Article, the previously granted Certificate of Professional Competence shall be considered to have been revoked.

29. Penalty
Any person who violates this Proclamation or regulations issued thereunder shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Penal Code.

30. Power to Issue Regulations
The Council of Ministers shall issue detailed Regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this Proclamation.

31. Power to Issue Directives
The Ministry may issue directives for the implementation of this Proclamation.

32. Repealed and Inapplicable Laws

The Water Resources Utilization Proclamation No. 92/1994 is hereby repealed.

Any laws, regulations, directives, guidelines, or practices relating to matters covered by this Proclamation shall have no force or effect to the extent that they conflict with the provisions of this Proclamation.

33. Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force as of the 9th day of March, 2000.

Done at Addis Ababa, this 9th day of March, 2000.

DR. NEGASO GIDADA
PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA