

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Water Authority of Fiji Promulgation 2007  
 
REPUBLIC OF FIJI ISLANDS 
 
 
WATER AUTHORITY OF FIJI PROMULGATION 2007 
(PROMULGATION NO. 25 OF 2007) 
____________ 
 
 
TABLE OF PROVISIONS  
 
 
PART 1— PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title and commencement 
2. Interpretation 
3. Objectives of this Promulgation 
4. Application of the Public Enterprise Act 
 
PART 2 — ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE WATER 
AUTHORITY OF FIJI AND ITS BOARD 
 
5. Establishment of the Authority 
6. Transfer and acquisition of assets and liabilities 
7. Functions of the Authority 
8. Powers of the Authority 
9. Board of the Authority 
10. Resignation and removal 
11. Meetings of the Board 
12. Duties and obligations of the Board 
13. Disclosure of interests 
 
PART 3— MANAGEMENT AND FINANCE OF AUTHORITY 
 
14. Appointment of the Chief Executive Officer 
15. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer 
16. Appointment of staff 
17. Funds of the Authority 
18. Borrowing powers, etc 
19. Financial year 
20. Half-yearly and annual reports 
21. Corporate plan 
22. Statement of corporate intent 
23. Audit 
 
PART 4—OPERATIONS OF THE AUTHORITY 


--- PAGE 2 ---

 
24. Rights to use or access land 
25. Government may direct Authority to undertake certain work 
26. Authority may supply services 
27. Installation of service connection points 
28. Water quality standards 
29. Notice to be given of removal of property 
30. Conditions of supply 
31. Power to discontinue or ration supplies 
32. No claim for failure of or interruption to supply 
33. Fixing of rates 
34. Obligations to pay rates, interests and discounts 
35. Disconnection of supply of water 
 
PART 5 —MISCELLANEOUS 
 
36. Offences of wilful destruction of assets of the Authority and obstructions, etc 
37. Authority may prosecute 
38. Authority may delegate 
39. No liability for escape of water 
40. Protection of persons acting under authority 
41. Binds the Government 
42. Regulations 
43. Repeals and consequential amendments 
44. Transitional and savings 
 
 
___________ 
 
WATER AUTHORITY OF FIJI PROMULGATION 2007 
(PROMULGATION NO. 25 OF 2007) 
 
 
IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred upon the Interim Government, and upon the exercise 
of my own deliberate judgement as President of the Republic of the Fiji Islands as to what is 
best and good for the people of Fiji, and by the executive authority of the State in accordance 
with section 85 of the Constitution and such other powers as may appertain, and with the 
advice of Cabinet, I, Josefa Iloilovatu Uluivuda, make this Promulgation- 
 
TO ESTABLISH THE WATER AUTHORITY OF FIJI AND TO PROVIDE FOR ITS 
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS FOR THE PURPOSES OF MANAGING WATER AND 
SEWERAGE SYSTEMS, AND FOR RELATED MATTERS 
 
 
PART 1— PRELIMINARY 
 
 
Short title and commencement 
 
 


--- PAGE 3 ---

1.-(1) This Promulgation may be cited as the Water Authority of Fiji Promulgation 2007. 
 
(2) This Promulgation comes into force on a date or dates appointed by the Minister, by 
notice in the Gazette. 
 
Interpretation 
 
 
2. In this Promulgation, unless the context otherwise requires- 
 
 
"assets" of the Authority, means any property owned, controlled and managed by the 
Authority; 
 
"Authority" means the Water Authority of Fiji established by section 5; 
 
"Board" means the Board of the Authority established by section 9; 
 
"customer" means- 
 
(a) the owner or occupier of premises which are connected to the Water System, and to which 
water or any other service is supplied by the Authority; 
 
(b) the owner or occupier of premises which are connected to the Sewerage System from 
which sewage or waste water is collected by the Authority; 
 
(c) any person who assumes responsibility to the Authority in relation to a communal water 
supply or sanitation to a village or rural community; or 
 
(d) any person to whom water or any other service is supplied by the Authority under a 
customer contract; 
 
"Chief Executive Officer" means the person appointed as such under section 14, and includes 
the person acting in that office; 
 
"Department" means the Water and Sewerage Department that is subject to reorganization 
under the Public Enterprise Act 1996; 
 
"officer" includes any staff member of or persons authorized by the Authority exercising the 
powers of an officer under this Promulgation; 
 
"other services" includes – 
 
(a) sewage disposal, waste water disposal or liquid trade waste disposal; or 
 
(b) construction services or consultancy services relating to any such disposal;  
 
"premises" includes any vacant land or area, aircraft, vehicle or vessel; 
 


--- PAGE 4 ---

"rates" means the rates fixed pursuant to this Promulgation for the supply of water or the 
provision of sewerage services; 
 
"Sewerage System" means the sewerage system established and maintained by the Authority;  
 
"State assets" has the meaning given to it in the Financial Management Act 2004;  
 
"Water System" means the water system established and maintained by the Authority. 
Objectives of this Promulgation 
 
 
3. The objectives of this Promulgation are - 
 
 
(a) to give effect to the reorganization of the Water and Sewerage Department under the 
Public Enterprise Act 1996; 
 
(b) to make provision for the effective management and administration of the Water and the 
Sewerage Systems; 
 
(c) to provide efficient and reliable services to customers and to ensure that the services are 
undertaken competently and professionally. 
 
Application of the Public Enterprise Act 
 
 
4.-(1) The provisions of the Public Enterprise Act 1996 relating the management and 
operations of commercial statutory authority apply with necessary modifications, and if there 
is any inconsistency between a provision of this Promulgation and the Public Enterprise Act 
1996, the provision of the Public Enterprise Act 1996 prevails. 
 
(2) The Authority is declared a Commercial Statutory Authority for the purposes of the Public 
Enterprise Act 1996. 
 
 
PART 2 - ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF 
THE WATER AUTHORITY OF FIJI AND ITS BOARD 
 
 
Establishment the Authority 
 
5. This section establishes the Water Authority of Fiji, as a corporate body with perpetual 
succession and a common seal, and the Authority may- 
 
 
(a) sue and be sued; 
 
(b) acquire, hold and dispose of property; 
 
(c) enter into contract, agreement or other transactions; or 


--- PAGE 5 ---

 
(d) do all other acts that may be done in law by bodies corporate. 
 
Transfer and acquisition of assets and liabilities 
 
 
6.-(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the Land Transfer Act (Cap. 131), and in a manner 
consistent with the provisions of the Public Enterprise Act 1996, State assets under the control 
and management of the Water and Sewerage Department set out in a regulation made under 
section 42 are transferred to and shall vest in the Authority at the commencement of this 
Promulgation, without further assurance and conveyance, or in accordance with the provision 
of the Public Enterprise Act 1996, relating to the transfer of assets. 
 
(2) All transfers of land and property made in accordance with subsection (1) shall not be 
subject to transfer fees, stamp duties or any other tax or charge applying under any law. 
 
(3) The Authority may acquire any land pursuant to the State Acquisition of Lands Act, for 
the purposes of its Water or Sewerage Systems. 
 
(4) Any Government liability incurred by the Department on or before the commencement of 
this Promulgation shall remain with and continues to be the liability of the Government, 
unless the Government and the Authority agree that the liability shall be transferred to and 
becomes the liability of the Authority in accordance with the provision of the Public 
Enterprise Act 1996, relating to the transfer of liabilities. 
 
 
Functions of the Authority 
 
 
7. The functions of the Authority are - 
 
 
(a) to harvest, treat and reticulate water for supply to its customers; 
 
(b) to comply with standards in relation to the supply and quality of water in its Water 
System; 
 
(c) to collect, transport, treat and discharge waste water for the purposes of this Promulgation; 
 
(d) to establish, operate and maintain systems for the provision of water and sewerage 
services; 
 
(e) to maintain any State assets transferred to and vested in it by the Government pursuant to 
this Promulgation or any other written law; 
 
(f) to provide technical or expert advice to any other person on matters relating to its functions 
and powers; 
 
(g) to progressively achieve economic viability in the provision of water supply and sewerage 
services; 


--- PAGE 6 ---

 
(h) to be environmentally responsible in the performance of all its activities; 
 
(i) to assist in protecting, managing and conserving water resources; 
 
(j) to assist in the formulation and implementation of national policies or urban and rural land 
use planning, relating to the use and control of water bodies and resources. 
 
Powers of the Authority 
 
 
8. For the purposes of carrying out its functions and objectives, the Authority has the 
following powers- 
 
 
(a) to acquire, construct, install, maintain and operate plant, equipment, machinery or any 
other facility or assets, for the supply of water and the provision for sewerage services and 
other services; 
 
(b) to acquire the legal right to water sources and the right to obtain or draw water from the 
water sources for the purposes of its Water System; 
 
(c) to enter any premises for the purposes of constructing, installing, maintaining, repairing or 
operating its plant, equipment, machinery or any other facility or asset; 
 
(d) for the purposes of its Water and Sewerage System, to construct, use or access any road, 
area, premises, structure, machinery, State asset or other property of other person, for such 
purposes; 
 
(e) to use any natural watercourse for the discharge of overflows from its activities under this 
Promulgation, subject to the requirements under other written laws; 
 
(f) to acquire easements or other legal right of way or access to any private property or State 
assets; 
 
(g) whenever necessary, to control or ration the supply of water; 
 
(h) to recover the capital cost of supplying water or other services to particular premises on 
terms and conditions, as the Authority determines; 
 
(i) to investigate any breach of this Promulgation, or any act that affects the ability of the 
Authority to provide services under this Promulgation, and to take steps as it considers 
necessary to secure compliance with this Promulgation or to prevent interference with the 
activities of the Authority, subject to the general powers of investigation of the police; 
 
(j) to formulate, monitor, enforce and review policies, procedures, standards, codes of practice 
and practice directions; 
 


--- PAGE 7 ---

(k) to disconnect or refuse to connect to its assets any work which has been carried out by a 
customer or any other person, which contravenes this Promulgation or its policy, procedure, 
standard or code of practice; 
 
(l) to exercise other powers conferred upon it under this Promulgation or any other written 
law. 
 
Board of the Authority 
 
 
9.-(1) This section establishes the Board of the Authority consisting of the following 
members, who are to be appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Minister 
responsible for Public Enterprises and the Minister for responsible for Finance - 
 
 
(a) a Chairperson; 
 
(b) 5 other members. 
 
(2) A person is qualified for appointment to the Board if the person is suitably qualified, 
including qualifications and experience in management, commerce, business, public 
administration, engineering or law. 
 
(3) The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry responsible for the administration of this 
Promulgation or his or her nominee shall be an ex officio member of the Board with no voting 
rights. 
 
(4) A member of the Board may be appointed for a term not exceeding 3 years, and is eligible 
for re-appointment for such term. 
 
(5) A member of the Board is entitled to remuneration applicable to boards of commercial 
statutory authorities appointed under the Public Enterprise Act 1996. 
 
 
Resignation and removal 
 
10.-(1) A member of the Board may resign from his or her office by giving 30 days prior 
notice to the Minister. 
 
(2) The Minister may remove a member of the Board if the member - 
 
 
(a) is absent from 3 consecutive meetings of the Board without leave of the Board; 
 
(b) is declared a bankrupt; or 
 
(c) is, for any reason, unable to perform his or her functions under this Promulgation. 
 
Meetings of the Board 
 


--- PAGE 8 ---

 
11.-(1) The Board shall meet at least once in every 2 months, as the Chairperson may 
determine or by notice signed by at least 3 members. 
 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board, and if the Chairperson is 
absent, the members present may elect a member present to preside at that meeting. 
 
(3) The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be 4 voting members. 
 
(4) A resolution signed or assented to, by way of a letter, facsimile transmission or email 
message or other means of technology, by each member shall have the same effect as a 
resolution passed at a meeting of the Board. 
 
(5) Subject to this Promulgation, the Board may regulate other meeting proceedings. 
 
 
Duties and obligations of the Board 
 
 
12.-(1) The Board is the governing and executive body of the Authority and has the authority 
to perform the functions and powers of the Authority under this Promulgation or any other 
written law. 
 
(2) A member shall act at all times in a manner so as- 
 
 
(a) to advance the interests of the Authority and its customers; 
 
(b) to comply with the obligations of directors under the Public Enterprise Act 1996; 
 
(c) to implement any Government policy, consistent with the functions of the Authority, given 
to the Board by the Minister; 
 
(d) not to publicly disclose any matter relevant to the deliberations of the Board unless 
authorised to make that disclosure or it is in the public interest that the disclosure be made. 
 
Disclosure interests 
 
 
13.-(1) A member shall disclose to the Board any direct or indirect interest the member may 
have in any matter that is being considered or about to be considered by the Board is 
disclosed to the Board. 
 
(2) A disclosure of interest under subsection (1) shall be recorded in the minutes, and upon 
making the disclosure, the member shall leave the meeting when the matter is under  
consideration, but without prejudice to the constitution of the quorum for that meeting. 
 
(3) If the Chief Executive Officer or an officer of the Authority is requested to attend its 
Board meeting, this section and section 12(2)(d) apply to the Chief Executive Officer or the 
officer. 


--- PAGE 9 ---

 
 
PART 3 — MANAGEMENT AND FINANCE OF AUTHORITY 
 
 
Appointment of the Chief Executive Officer 
 
 
14.-(1) The Board may appoint a suitably qualified person as the Chief Executive Officer of 
the Authority, in accordance with other terms and conditions the Board may approve. 
 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may be appointed for a term of not less than 3 years, and is 
eligible for re-appointment. 
 
(3) The Board may appoint suitably qualified person to act as Chief Executive Officer for the 
purposes of this Promulgation. 
 
(4) The Chief Executive Officer is entitled to remuneration to be fixed by the Higher Salaries 
Commission. 
 
 
Functions of the Chief Executive Officer 
 
 
15.-(l) The Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible to the Board for the management of 
the Authority. 
 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall attend every meeting of the Board, and if he or she is, 
for any reason, unable to attend a meeting, the Chief Executive Officer may, in consultation 
with the Chairperson, nominate an officer to attend on his or her behalf. 
 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall not engage in any other business without the prior 
consent of the Board. 
 
 
Appointment of staff 
 
 
16.-(1) The Authority may employ other officers and staff for the purposes of this 
Promulgation. 
 
(2) The Board shall approve policies and procedures relating to the employment of officers 
and staff of the Authority and such policies and procedures shall constitute the conditions of 
employment of the staff of the Authority. 
 
(3) The policies and procedures referred to in subsection (2) shall relate to- 
 
 
(a) the appointment, promotion, transfer, suspension, retirement, retrenchment and 
termination; 


--- PAGE 10 ---

 
(b) job descriptions, job classifications, employer and employee duties, privileges, 
responsibilities and performance criteria; 
 
(c) the remuneration and conditions of employment of staff; 
 
(d) disciplinary offences and procedures; 
 
(e) the imposition of penalties for disciplinary breaches; 
 
(f) matters guaranteeing the equal opportunity and treatment all of employees; 
 
(g) matters relating to the welfare of staff; and 
 
(h) issues relating to safe work practices and the assurance of a safe and healthy working 
environment under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1996. 
 
Funds of the Authority 
 
 
17. The funds of the Authority for the purposes of this Promulgation shall consist of- 
 
 
(a) any money appropriated by Parliament; 
 
(b) rates, fees and other charges received by or on behalf of the Authority by virtue of this 
Promulgation; and 
 
(c) any other money received by or on behalf of the Authority. 
 
Borrowing powers, etc 
 
 
18.-(1) For the purposes of its functions and powers under this Promulgation, the Authority 
may borrow any amount not exceeding $100,000 per transaction from a lending institution. 
 
(2) The Authority shall first obtain the approval of the Minister and the Minister responsible 
for Finance for any amount exceeding $100,000, subject to terms and conditions imposed by 
the Minister responsible for Finance. 
 
(3) The Authority shall not undertake any capital projects exceeding $1,500,000 except with 
the approval of the Minister and after the Minister has consulted the Minister responsible for 
Finance and the Minister responsible for Public Enterprises. 
 
(4) The Minister may, by regulations, increase the amount specified under this section. 
 
 
Financial year 
 
 


--- PAGE 11 ---

19. The financial year of the Authority shall be determined by the Board with the approval of 
the Minister. 
 
 
Half yearly and annual reports 
 
 
20.-(1) A report required under this section shall- 
 
 
(a) be submitted to the Minister, the Minister responsible for Public Enterprises and the 
Minister responsible for Finance; and 
 
(b) be tabled by the Minister in both Houses of Parliament. 
 
(2) The Authority shall provide a report on its operation for the first half of a financial year. 
 
(3) The half-yearly report under subsection (2) shall- 
 
 
(c) be given within 2 months after the end of the first half of the financial year; or 
 
(d) if another period is agreed to between the Minister and the Board, be given within the 
agreed period. 
 
(4) A half-yearly report under subsection (2) shall include the information required to be 
given in the statement of corporate intent. 
 
(5) Within 3 months after the end of each financial year, the Authority shall prepare- 
 
 
(a) a draft report on its operations for that financial year; 
 
(b) an unaudited consolidated financial statement for that financial year consisting of 
statements of financial position, profit and loss, changes in financial position, and any other 
statements as may be necessary to show as accurately as possible its financial position. 
 
(6) A draft report prepared under subsection (5)- 
 
 
(a) shall as far as possible contain information required to be contained in its annual report; 
and 
 
(b) is not required to be tabled in Parliament. 
 
(7) Within 5 months after the end of each financial year, the Authority shall prepare- 
 
 
(a) an annual report on its operations for that financial year; 
 


--- PAGE 12 ---

(b) audited consolidated financial statements for that financial year consisting of statements of 
financial position, profit and loss, changes in financial position, and any other statements as 
may be necessary to show as accurately as possible its financial position; 
 
(c) the auditor's report on those financial statements. 
 
(8) The annual report shall contain such information as is necessary to enable an informed 
assessment of the operations of the Authority, including a comparison of its performance with 
its statement of corporate intent. 
 
(9) Subsection (7) does not limit the matters that are required to be included in or to 
accompany the annual report as required by any other written law. 
 
(10) The Authority may request the Minister to delete from its report to be tabled in the House 
of Representatives or to be made public, any matter that is of a commercially sensitive nature, 
and the Minister may delete such commercially sensitive nature from the report. 
 
 
Corporate plan 
 
 
21.-(1) The Authority shall have a corporate plan setting out the following- 
 
 
(a) the plans for its future operations; 
 
(b) the forecasts relating to the current financial year and the next 2 financial years of profit 
and loss account; 
 
(c) the balance sheet; 
 
(d) the sources and applications of funds; 
 
(e) cash flows; 
 
(f) statement of the assumptions on which the forecasts are based; and 
 
(g) any other information as is necessary for such plans. 
 
(2) The Authority shall, within the prescribed time, prepare a draft corporate plan and submit 
it to the Minister responsible for Public Enterprises for his approval after consulting the 
Minister and the Minister responsible for Finance. 
 
(3) The corporate plan shall be in accordance with its statement of corporate intent. 
 
(4) This section does not limit the matters that are required to be included in or to accompany 
the corporate plan as required by any other written law. 
 
 
Statement of corporate intent 


--- PAGE 13 ---

 
 
22.-(1) The Authority shall have a statement of corporate intent for each financial year setting 
out the following- 
 
 
(a) an outline of its objectives; 
 
(b) an outline of its main undertakings for that year or for the long term; 
 
(c) a summary of the main elements of its corporate plan and any other matters set out under 
this Act or any other written law; 
 
(d) the financial and non-financial performance targets for its activities; 
 
(e) an outline of the nature and scope of its activities proposed to be undertaken; 
 
(f) an outline of its policies and procedures relating to acquisition and disposal of its major 
assents; 
 
(g) its accounting policies; 
 
(h) its financial and non-financial targets and other measures by which its performance may 
be judged in relation to its objectives; 
 
(i) an estimate of the amount or proportion of accumulated profits and capital reserves that is 
intended to be distributed to the State; 
 
(j) an estimate of the commercial value of any State investment in it and the manner on which, 
and the times at which such value is to be reassessed; 
 
(k) the type of information to be given to the Minister, Minister responsible for Public 
Enterprises and the Minister responsible for Finance in the course of the financial year, 
including information to be given in half-yearly and annual reports; 
 
(l) its non-commercial obligations undertaken for the benefit of Fiji, including the costing, 
funding and other arrangements on such obligations; 
 
(m) any other matter as the Minister may specify in writing to it. 
 
(2) The Authority shall, within the prescribed time, prepare a draft of its statement of 
corporate intent and submit it to the Minister responsible for Public Enterprises for his 
approval after consulting the Minister and the Minister responsible for Finance. 
 
(3) This section does not limit the matters that are required to be included in or to accompany 
the statement of the statement of corporate intent as required by any other written law. 
 
 
Audit 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---

 
23.-(1) The Authority is required to be audited at least once in every year. 
 
(2) The audit is to be conducted in accordance with the Audit Act and the Financial 
Management Act, except where the audit is conducted by a person appointed by the Board 
under section (3)(b). 
 
(3) The audit is to be conducted- 
 
 
(a) by the Auditor-General or a person authorised or contracted under the Audit Act to carry it 
out, unless the Authority is exempted from audit under that Act by the regulations under that 
Act; or 
 
(b) by a person appointed by the Board, if the Authority is so exempted from audit under the 
Audit Act. 
 
(4) The person appointed by the Board under section (3)(b) is to be- 
 
 
(a) the person that the Minister responsible for Finance directs the Board in writing to 
appoint; or 
 
(b) if the Minister responsible for Finance gives no such direction, the person chosen by the 
Board. 
 
(5) This section applies notwithstanding any other written law. 
 
 
PART 4 — OPERATIONS OF THE AUTHORITY 
 
 
Rights to use or access land 
 
 
24.-(1) An officer of the Authority may enter, remain or cross any land at any reasonable time 
when carrying out any function or power under this Promulgation. 
 
(2) If the Authority does any work on the property of another person, for the purposes of this 
Promulgation, the Authority shall, as far as is practicable - 
 
 
(a) ensure that little damage is caused to the property; and 
 
(b) restore the surface of and repair any damage on, such property. 
 
Government may direct Authority to undertake certain work 
 
 


--- PAGE 15 ---

25.-(1) The Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet and by his or her written directions, 
require the Authority to undertake any work specified in such directions. 
 
(2) When implementing any direction given under subsection (1), the Authority shall comply 
with the requirement of any other written law affecting such directions or its functions and 
powers. 
 
(3) The Government is responsible for the costs of undertaking any work required under any 
direction given under subsection (1), subject to agreement on the costs between the 
Government and the Authority. 
 
(4) If the Government requires the Authority to undertake an activity that is not in the 
commercial interests of the Authority, such activity shall be deemed to be a non-commercial 
obligation under Division 13 of Part 3 of the Public Enterprise Act 1996. 
 
 
Authority may supply services 
 
 
26. The owner or occupier of premises in an area where the Authority is able to supply water 
or provide sewerage or other services to such premises may, in writing, apply to the Authority 
for the supply of water or for the provision of sewerage or other services, subject to 
conditions. 
 
 
Installation of service connection points 
 
 
27.-(1) The Authority may provide service connections to premises within the vicinity of such 
premises. 
 
(2) No owner or occupier of premises shall connect the premises to the Water System or 
Sewerage System except with the prior written approval issued by the Authority. 
 
(3) A connection made by the owner or occupier under subsection (2) shall be done at the 
expense of the owner or occupier, subject to conditions imposed by the Authority. 
 
(4) A connection to the Water System shall be metered, unless the Authority dispenses with 
the meter requirement. 
 
 
Water quality standards 
 
 
28.-(1) The Minister .responsible for Health may - 
 
 
(a) approve water quality standards, including standards for treatment of water and assets used 
for such treatment; and 
 


--- PAGE 16 ---

(b) direct the Authority or, in certain circumstances, the owner or occupier of premises 
supplied with water, to meet the standards. 
 
(2) The Authority and, in certain circumstances, the owner or occupier of premises that are 
being supplied with water, shall comply with standards. 
 
(3) If any standard under subsection (1) is not complied with, the Authority or owner or 
occupier may disconnect the water supply to affected premises. 
 
 
Notice to be given of removal of property 
 
 
29.-(1) If the owner or occupier of premises intends to remove his or her property which is 
connected to the Water or Sewerage System, the owner or occupier shall give 14 days written 
notice to the Authority, including the address of the premises, the description of the property 
to be removed and the date and time for such removal. 
 
(2) The owner or occupier that gives notice under subsection (1) is liable for any damage to 
the assets of the Authority arising out of the removal of such property. 
 
 
Conditions of supply 
 
 
30.-(1) The Authority may, when connecting premises to its Water or Sewerage System, 
impose conditions of supply, which shall form the basis of the contractual relationship 
between the Authority and the customer. 
 
(2) Any condition provided under subsection (1) may be amended by the Authority, and if the 
condition applies to any existing customer, the Authority shall give written notice to the 
existing customer. 
 
(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), the Authority may publish such written notice- 
 
 
(a) on 3 separate days in at least 2 newspapers circulating widely in Fiji; or 
 
(b) on 3 separate days on a radio station or television station broadcasting widely Fiji. 
 
(4) The obligations of a customer in relation to supply are- 
 
 
(a) to be aware of the liability to the Authority and to promptly pay for services provided by 
the Authority; 
 
(b) to protect the assets of the Authority; 
 
(c) to provide correct and up to date information to the Authority, including changes of 
ownership and occupation of premises; 


--- PAGE 17 ---

 
(d) to promptly advise the Authority of any defects in the assets of the Authority and to 
minimise any damage or consequence of such defects; 
 
(e) to permit Chief Executive Officer, officers and staff of the Authority to have access to the 
customer's premises in order to carry out the Authority's work in accordance with this 
Promulgation. 
 
(5) The obligations of the Authority in relation to supply are - 
 
 
(a) to only impose charges and price increases in accordance with the Commerce Act 1998; 
 
(b) to provide timely response to reports of defects in its assets affecting the supply to 
customers or posing risks to life or property; or 
 
(c) to provide as efficient and affordable a service as is possible to as many areas as are 
possible. 
 
Power to discontinue or ration supplies 
 
 
31.-(1) In addition to any other powers of the Authority under this Promulgation, the 
Authority may without notice discontinue, ration or limit any supply of water or other service 
provided by it if it considers it necessary or desirable to do so- 
 
 
(a) by reason of any accident or emergency; 
 
(b) to facilitate any work done or to be done by the Authority; 
 
(c) to avoid or limit pollution; or 
 
(d) for the conservation of water. 
 
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the Authority shall- 
 
 
(a) by two or more radio announcements; or 
 
(b) by personal notice given to affected customers, 
 
give notice of its action and indicate the likely duration of such discontinuance, rationing or 
limitation. 
 
 
No claim for failure of or interruption to supply 
 
 


--- PAGE 18 ---

32.-(1) The Authority shall not be liable for any loss or damage suffered by a person, if there 
is an increase, diminution or discontinuance in the supply of water or any other service 
provided by the Authority, or if there is a diminution in the quality of water- 
 
 
(a) caused by accident, drought or other natural phenomenon or other unavoidable cause; 
 
(b) caused by the Authority purporting to act in good faith in the proper exercise of its 
functions; or 
 
(c) resulting from the exercise by the Authority of its power under this Promulgation. 
 
(2) If the Authority intends to do any act which is likely to increase, diminish or discontinue 
the supply of water or any other service, or to diminish the quality of water supplied to any 
premises, the Authority shall, if practicable, give 24 hours notice of such intention to the 
customers likely to be affected. 
 
(3) For the purpose of subsection (2) it shall be sufficient notice to customers if the notice is 
published at least once in two newspapers circulating widely in Fiji and announced at least 
once on a radio station and a television station broadcasting throughout Fiji. 
 
 
Fixing of rates 
 
 
33.-(1) Subject to the Commerce Act 1998, the Board may fix the amount of rates including 
interests on unpaid rates, to be paid in respect of any service and any matter associated with 
the provision of services in accordance with this Promulgation. 
 
(2) Prior to imposing or increasing any rate under subsection (1), the Authority shall give 
public notice of proposed imposition or alteration through public notices in at least two 
newspapers circulating widely in Fiji. 
 
(3) The conditions of supply of such service may make provision in relation to any matter 
associated with the levying of rates by the Authority, and mechanisms for their collection. 
 
 
Obligation to pay rates, interests and discounts 
 
 
34.-(1) The owner of premises to which services are provided by the Authority is liable to pay 
any rates due to the Authority in respect of such services. 
 
(2) If any rates remain unpaid at the expiry of 30 days from the date on which the rates fall 
due the Authority may charge the prescribed interest on the amount of the unpaid sum from 
the date they fall due until the date of payment. 
 
(3) The Authority may fix and allow discounts for prompt payment of rates, fees and charges. 
 
 


--- PAGE 19 ---

Disconnection of supply of water 
 
 
35.-(1) If any rates in respect of any premises remain unpaid after becoming due for payment, 
the Authority may disconnect the supply of water in accordance with the prescribed 
procedures. 
 
(2) If the supply of water is disconnected under subsection (1), the supply shall not be 
reconnected unless the owner or occupier of the premises applies for reconnection and pays 
all costs associated with the disconnection and reconnection of the supply and all outstanding 
amounts. 
 
 
PART 5 — MISCELLANEOUS 
 
 
Offences of willful destruction of assets of the Authority and obstruction, etc 
 
 
36.-(1) A person who willfully, destroys, damages, tampers with or interferes with any assets 
of the Authority, including its Water System or Sewerage System commits an offence and is 
liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $1,000,000 or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding 10 years. 
 
(2) A person who- 
 
 
(a) obstructs or attempts to obstruct the officer of the Authority in the exercise of any power 
or duty under this Promulgation; 
 
(b) sells or offers for sale any prescribed plumbing or associated hardware for the exclusive 
use of the Authority or uses such plumbing hardware in any manner inconsistent with the 
regulations, 
 
(c) contravenes section 8(1) (k); 
 
commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $10,000 or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years. 
 
(3) In this section, "officer" includes a member of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer. 
 
 
Authority may prosecute 
 
 
37.-(1) The Authority may institute and conduct prosecutions in respect of any offence 
alleged to have been committed against this Promulgation, subject to the powers of the 
Director of Public Prosecutions. 
 


--- PAGE 20 ---

(2) Upon securing a conviction in relation to a prosecution taken under subsection (1), the 
Authority is entitled to the costs incurred by the Authority in the conduct of the prosecution. 
 
 
Authority may delegate 
 
 
38. Without prejudice to sections 31A to 31C of the Interpretation Act, the Authority may, 
subject to conditions, delegate to a person its functions or powers under this Promulgation or 
any other written law. 
 
 
No liability for escape of water 
 
 
39. The Authority is not liable for any loss or damage arising from the escape of water from 
its assets. 
 
 
Protection of persons acting under authority 
 
 
40. An officer or staff of the Authority shall not be personally liable for any act done in good 
faith arising out the exercise of any power or duty under this Promulgation. 
 
 
Binds the Government 
 
 
41. This Promulgation binds the Government. 
 
 
Regulations 
 
 
42.-(1) The Minister may make regulations to give effect to the provisions of this 
Promulgation, and in particular for the purposes of- 
 
 
(a) prescribing forms, permits or notices, for the purposes of this Promulgation; 
 
(b) prescribing standards for waste water treatment; 
 
(c) prescribing other fees, charges and the rate of interests for the purposes of this 
Promulgation; 
 
(d) regulating use, conservation and management of water resources; 
 
(e) regulating pollution that may affect water resources or Water System; 
 


--- PAGE 21 ---

(f) regulating the supply of water in times of deficiency or anticipated deficiency of water, 
including emergency situations; 
 
(g) prohibiting use of certain plumbing and associated hardware by other persons, for the 
purposes of exclusive use of the Authority; 
 
(h) regulating the procedures for competitive tender processes required under this 
Promulgation. 
 
(2) If forms are required to be prescribed under subsection (1), the Authority shall use the 
prescribed forms, and if no such forms are prescribed, the Authority may, approve forms for 
such purpose. 
 
(3) Any regulation made under this Promulgation may prescribe fines not exceeding $2,000 or 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months. 
 
 
Repeals and consequential amendments 
 
 
43.-(1) The Water Act (Cap. 144) and the Sewerage Act (Cap. 28) are repealed. 
 
(2) Any subsidiary legislation made pursuant to the Acts repealed under subsection (1) 
continues in force until replaced by subsidiary legislation made under this Promulgation. 
 
(3) From the commencement of this Promulgation, any reference to the Department in any 
written law, contract, instrument, register, other public or private document or court 
proceedings shall be replaced with the Authority. 
 
 
Transitional and savings 
 
 
44.-(1) Any contract entered into by the Department on behalf of the Government and exists 
as at the commencement of this Promulgation shall continue in force and is deemed to have 
been entered into by the Authority pursuant to this Promulgation, unless the Government and 
Authority agrees in writing that the contract to remain with the Government. 
 
(2) All fees, dues, and charges owing to the Government through the Department and unpaid 
as at the commencement of this Promulgation, are transferred and payable to the Authority. 
 
(3) At the commencement of this Promulgation, any valid approval, permit or authority 
granted pursuant to the Acts repealed under subsection 43(1) shall continue in force and is 
deemed to have been issued under this Promulgation. 
 
(4) If any law requires that notice of any matter be given to the Department, the person 
obliged to give the notice shall give the notice to the Authority. 
 
(5) The Minister may make regulations to provide for other transitional and saving provisions. 
 


--- PAGE 22 ---

GIVEN UNDER MY HAND this 21st day of August 2007. 
 
 
 
J. I. ULUIVUDA 
President of the Republic of the Fiji Islands 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
© 1998 University of the South Pacific  
 
