LAW OF GEORGIA

ON WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

Chapter I

General Provisions

Article 1. Purpose and Objective of the Law

The purpose of this Law is to create the legal framework for water resources management in the country, which shall ensure the implementation of a unified state policy in the sphere of water resources protection and use, the right of citizens to access clean water, the creation of a safe environment for human health and life, and the protection and sustainable use of water resources in accordance with the principles of integrated management.

The objective of this Law is to create a system of sustainable integrated management of water resources that:
a) protects the status of the water ecosystem, including water quality, and prevents its further deterioration;
b) protects and improves the state of water resources and, based on the need for water, the state of terrestrial and wetland ecosystems that are directly dependent on water ecosystems;
c) promotes the creation of a flood risk assessment and management system;
d) creates a legal basis for the sustainable use of water resources, taking into account the interests of present and future generations and the principles of sustainable development;
e) promotes the reduction of risks caused by climate change in the field of water resources management;
f) ensures the protection of water resources and the environment and the improvement of their condition, by means of the phased reduction and prevention of the entry and/or discharge of priority polluting substances, as defined by the legislation of Georgia, into water bodies, and consequently, water loss;
g) creates a legal basis for the identification of zones of polluted or at-risk groundwater, the phased reduction of pollution, and protection from future pollution;
h) protects the rights and legal interests of natural and legal persons in the sphere of water resources protection and use.

Article 2. Subject of Regulation of the Law

This Law establishes the main principles for the protection and use of water resources, and also regulates legal relations:
a) between state authorities and natural and legal persons in the sphere of water resources protection and use;
b) concerning the competences of the autonomous republics and municipalities in relation to the management of water resources.

Article 3. Scope of Regulation of the Law

The scope of regulation of this Law includes surface water and groundwater and their protection zones.

Issues related to the use of groundwater are regulated by this Law and the Law of Georgia "On Subsoil."

This Law does not regulate issues related to the maritime space of Georgia (except in cases defined by this Law for coastal waters). The legal regime of the maritime space of Georgia is defined by the Law of Georgia "On the Maritime Space of Georgia."

The unified regime for the regulation of rivers, lakes, and coastal waters that extend beyond the borders of Georgia (international water resources) shall be determined by the international treaties of Georgia. Furthermore, within the framework of the said international treaties of Georgia, the management of international water resources shall be carried out on the basis of joint coordinated cooperation with the relevant states.

This Law shall apply to the parts of transboundary river basin districts, lakes, and coastal waters located on the territory of Georgia, unless otherwise provided for by an international treaty of Georgia. Furthermore, for the purpose of joint management of international water resources in accordance with this Law, the state shall ensure coordinated cooperation with the interested state in accordance with the international treaties ratified by Georgia.

When using water resources located in the border zone and border strip of the territory of Georgia, the requirements of the Law of Georgia "On the State Border of Georgia" and the relevant normative acts regulating the protection of the state border of Georgia must be observed.

Article 4. Definition of Terms

For the purposes of this Law, the terms used herein shall have the following meanings:
a) Water resources – the entirety of surface waters (including artificial water bodies) and groundwater.
b) Water resources management – the regulation, accounting, monitoring, and control of the use of water resources.
c) Integrated water resources management – a process that promotes the coordinated development and management of water, land, and related resources in order to maximize economic and social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems.
d) Surface waters – inland waters (except for groundwater), transitional waters, coastal waters, territorial waters, and waters of the exclusive economic zone.
e) Inland waters – rivers, lakes, glaciers, swamps, permanent snow cover, waters in reservoirs, canals and ponds, and also groundwater.
f) Transitional waters – bodies of surface water in the vicinity of river mouths which are partially saline as a result of their proximity to coastal waters but which are substantially influenced by freshwater flows.
g) Coastal waters – waters located at a distance of one nautical mile in the seaward direction from the shoreline.
h) Groundwater – water located in liquid, solid, and gaseous states in the rocks of the earth's crust, which is distributed in loose, porous, and fractured rocks, as well as in karst cavities.
i) River – a flow of water that constantly flows in a channel it has formed, is fed by surface and underground runoff from its catchment basin, and joins a sea, a lake, or another river.
j) Lake – a natural body of standing, slow-moving inland surface water located in a terrestrial basin.
k) Water use – the use of water resources for drinking, domestic, economic, and other activities, which is expressed in the abstraction, collection, processing, and/or distribution of surface water or groundwater with or without technical means; also, the discharge of wastewater into a surface water body.
l) Water user – a natural or legal person (regardless of ownership and legal form) who carries out water use in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Georgia.
m) River basin – an area of land bounded by a watershed, from which all surface run-off flows to a river system. A river basin may consist of river sub-basins.
n) River sub-basin – that part of a main river basin from which a tributary river collects surface water and groundwater. Tributary rivers are distinguished hydrographically as first-order (tributary of the main river), second-order (tributary of a first-order river), etc. tributaries.
o) River basin district – the combination of the territory and aquatory consisting of one or more neighboring river basins, along with the associated groundwater and coastal waters.
p) River basin/basin district management territorial unit – a river basin or river basin district (including the groundwater and coastal waters distributed within their boundaries and associated with them), which is the main unit of river basin/basin district management.
q) River basin/basin district management plan – a river basin/basin district management instrument, namely a plan of measures, upon which the management of a water body and the land of a water body located within the territory of a specific river basin/basin district is based, in accordance with the main principles of integrated water resources management.
r) Surface water body – a discrete and significant element of surface water such as a river, lake, swamp, reservoir, stream, canal or part thereof, transitional waters, or a stretch of coastal waters.
s) Groundwater body – a complex containing a distinct/specific volume of groundwater, an aquifer, or part thereof (water-bearing stratum, layer, section).
t) Heavily modified water body – a body of surface water which as a result of human activity is substantially changed in its biological and hydromorphological and physical-chemical character.
u) Artificial water body – a surface water body created by human activity.
v) Status of surface water – the general state of a surface water body, determined on the basis of the poorer of its ecological status and its chemical status.
w) Status of groundwater – the general state of a groundwater body, determined on the basis of the poorer of its quantitative status and its chemical status.
x) Ecological status – an expression of the quality of the structure and functioning of aquatic ecosystems associated with surface waters, determined on the basis of biological quality elements and the hydromorphological and physical-chemical quality elements required for these elements.
y) Swamp – a part of the landscape characterized by an excessively moist surface and by its biodiversity.
z) Pollution – the direct or indirect introduction, as a result of human activity, of solid or liquid substances or any form of energy (heat, noise, radioactivity) into the atmosphere, water, or soil, which may be harmful to human health, to water ecosystems or to those terrestrial ecosystems that depend on water ecosystems, and which causes damage to property, or which impairs or interferes with the state of the environment or the use of the environment for other legitimate purposes.
aa) Riverbed – the lowest part of a river valley in which water flows during periods between floods.
bb) Ministry – the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture of Georgia.
cc) Minister – the Minister of Environmental Protection and Agriculture of Georgia.
dd) State Water Fund of Georgia – the entirety of water in all water bodies located in Georgia.
ee) Land of the State Water Fund of Georgia (land of a water body) – land occupied by water bodies included in the State Water Fund of Georgia (except for groundwater), by hydrotechnical and other water management structures, as well as land allocated as a protection zone for a water body (water protection strip, sanitary protection zone).
ff) Environmental flow of a river – the quantity, regime, quality, and level of water flow necessary to sustain freshwater ecosystems and the livelihoods and well-being of people who depend on these ecosystems.
gg) Permit for water abstraction from a surface water body – a special water use permit that grants its holder the right to abstract a certain amount of water from a surface water body for a specified period of time using technical means.
hh) Permit for water discharge into a surface water body – a special water use permit that grants its holder the right, for a specified period of time, to carry out the organized discharge of domestic, industrial, drainage, stormwater, and other waters into a surface water body, in compliance with the established norms for the composition of these waters.
ii) Combined permit for water use of a surface water body – a special water use permit that grants its holder the right, for a specified period of time, to carry out both water abstraction from a surface water body and water discharge into a surface water body.
jj) Urban wastewater – domestic wastewater from a settlement or a mixture of domestic wastewater from a settlement with industrial wastewater and/or runoff rainwater.
kk) Impact – a change in the state of water caused by any human activity.
ll) Polluting substance – any substance causing pollution; the list of polluting substances is determined by the decree on surface water quality standards, which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
mm) Quantitative status of groundwater – the level of impact on a groundwater body by direct or indirect water abstraction.
nn) Eutrophication – the enrichment of a water body with biogenic elements (nitrogen, phosphorus), which, in turn, causes a reduction of dissolved oxygen in the water and, accordingly, has a negative impact on aquatic life.
oo) Ecological potential – the state (status) of a heavily modified water body and/or an artificial water body.
pp) Protected zone – territories located in each river basin district that require special protection for their surface waters and groundwater or for the protection of habitats and species directly related to water; including, territory intended for water abstraction for the purpose of supplying the population with drinking water, for the protection of economically important aquatic species, as well as recreational territory and territory vulnerable to biogenic substances (nutrients).
qq) Flood – a prolonged rise in the water level of a river as a result of snowmelt and/or intense rainfall, to a height that causes the inundation of the adjacent territory of the riverbed, which is not normally covered by water.
rr) Flood risk – the likely consequence of a potential flood within a certain period of time, which may be associated with a threat to human life and health, with economic and/or social damage and/or loss.
ss) Flash flood – a sudden, short-term rise in the water level of a river to a height that causes the inundation of the adjacent territory of the riverbed, which is not normally covered by water.
tt) Agglomeration – a territory where the population and/or economic activity is concentrated for the collection of urban wastewater and its transfer to a treatment facility, or for its discharge at a final point.
uu) Wastewater (sewerage) system – the wastewater system provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Energy and Water Supply".
vv) Local water resources – natural resources of local importance defined by the legislation of Georgia.
ww) Transboundary waters – any surface water and groundwater that mark, cross, or are located on the borders between two or more states.
xx) Water supply system – the water supply system provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Energy and Water Supply".
yy) Water supply/water supply activity – the water supply activity provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Energy and Water Supply".
zz) Water resources use – the consumption of water resources, which is carried out both by abstracting surface water and groundwater, and without abstracting water.
aaa) Environmental decision – the environmental decision provided for by the Environmental Assessment Code.
bbb) Integrated environmental permit – the permit provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Industrial Emissions".

Article 5. Main Principles of Integrated Water Resources Management

The main principles of integrated water resources management are:
a) complex protection and sustainable use of water resources at the national, regional, and local levels, on the basis of cooperation with water users;
b) regulation of water resources through the mechanism of river basin management, at the level of river catchment basins.

When planning and implementing activities that have an impact on water resources, natural and legal persons, government bodies, and other public institutions are obliged to be guided by the main principles of environmental protection established by this Law and the Law of Georgia "On Environmental Protection."

Chapter II

Competences in the Sphere of Protection and Use of Water Resources

Article 6. Competent Bodies in the Sphere of Protection and Use of Water Resources

The competent bodies in the sphere of protection and use of water resources are:
a) the Ministry;
b) the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia;
c) the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia;
d) the Ministry of Justice of Georgia;
e) the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia;
f) the Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission;
g) the municipality;
h) the government bodies of the autonomous republics of Georgia.

The competence of the Ministry includes:
a) the development and implementation of state policy for water resources management;
b) the development of proposals for the effective implementation of the state policy for water resources management and their submission to the Government of Georgia;
c) the establishment of a river basin management system;
d) the issuance of permits for special water use;
e) the implementation of unified state control over the protection and use of water resources on the land territory of Georgia, in its territorial waters, on the continental shelf, and in the exclusive economic zone;
f) the organization of qualitative, quantitative, and hydromorphological monitoring of water resources;
g) the organization of state accounting of water resources use, the analysis of water use reporting data, and the creation and operation of a database;
h) the organization of a water resources information system and ensuring access to information on water resources;
i) ensuring the development of a river basin/basin district management plan and its submission to the Government of Georgia for approval;
j) ensuring public participation in the process of developing a river basin/basin district management plan;
k) the coordination and monitoring of the implementation of a river basin/basin district management plan;
l) the organization of a system for the identification, assessment, mapping, forecasting, and early warning of flood and flash flood threats;
m) the organization of the preparation/development of recommendations on flood and flash flood mitigation measures;
n) the identification of zones polluted or at risk of pollution by nitrates and the determination of zones vulnerable to nitrates;
o) the identification of sensitive areas and agglomerations at risk of impact from urban wastewater;
p) the development of a surface water quality standard;
q) the determination of protection zones on the lands of the State Water Fund of Georgia;
r) the development and implementation of state policy in the field of hydromelioration;
s) ensuring state control over drinking water quality;
t) ensuring the provision of information to consumers about the qualitative state of drinking water;
u) the development of action plans for zones vulnerable to nitrates and the implementation of good agricultural practice;
v) the determination of nitrate concentrations in surface water and groundwater monitoring programs;
w) the identification of water protection strips and their mapping in the geographic information system;
x) the annual compilation of a water balance;
y) the study of the state of eutrophication of fresh surface waters, estuaries, and coastal waters within the deadlines and according to the rules established by the legislation of Georgia;
z) other powers provided for by the legislation of Georgia.

The competence of the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia includes:
a) the development of qualitative norms for drinking water and their submission to the Government of Georgia for approval;
b) the submission of recommendations to municipalities regarding the restriction or prohibition of general water use of a particular water body (this information is also sent to the Ministry for information);
c) the development of rules for the creation of a sanitary protection zone for drinking water supply facilities, the establishment of its boundaries, the division of its belts, and the list of activities permitted within them and the rules for carrying out such activities.

The competence of the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia includes ensuring the implementation of measures to promote the introduction and development of water supply systems and wastewater (sewerage) systems.

The competence of the Ministry of Justice of Georgia includes the registration of the land of the State Water Fund of Georgia in the Public Registry.

The competence of the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia includes participation in the development and implementation of the state policy for water resources management within its powers (economic policy, sustainable development, management of mineral resources, energy, energy efficiency, climate change and renewable energies, spatial planning of settlements, and others).

The competence of the Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission includes the implementation of the relevant powers arising from the Law of Georgia "On Energy and Water Supply," the Law of Georgia "On Water User Organizations," and other legislative acts.

The competence of the municipality includes:
a) participation in the implementation of measures for water supply and technical water provision, including:
a.a) participation in the preparation of technical and investment programs and projects for the collection and treatment of water supply systems and urban wastewater;
a.b) the approval of projects for the sanitary protection zones of drinking water supply facilities;
b) informing the population about the boundaries of the sanitary protection zone of drinking water supply facilities and its belts, as well as the regime applicable within this zone;
c) the management of local water resources.

The competence of the government bodies of the autonomous republics of Georgia includes participation in the management of water resources located on the territory of the autonomous republic, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Georgia.
Chapter III
Water Resources and their Legal Status, Water Bodies and their Protection Zones
Article 7. State Water Fund of Georgia
The water bodies of Georgia, based on their location on the surface of the land and within the subsoil, and according to the specifics of the formation and use of their resources, are divided into surface waters and groundwater.
Surface waters include the waters of all water bodies listed in paragraph 4 of this Article, except for the groundwater provided for in sub-paragraph "b" of the same paragraph.
The entirety of the water present in all water bodies of Georgia constitutes the State Water Fund of Georgia.
The State Water Fund of Georgia includes:
a) rivers, lakes, reservoirs, other natural and artificial water bodies, as well as the waters of canals and ponds, existing and flowing within the territory of Georgia;
b) groundwater;
c) glaciers and permanent snow cover;
d) swamps;
e) the territorial waters of Georgia;
f) the waters of the exclusive economic zone;
g) transitional waters and coastal waters.
Article 8. Property Rights to Water Resources
Water resources are state property.
Water resources of local importance, the management of which is carried out in accordance with this Law, the Organic Law of Georgia "Local Self-Government Code," and the legal acts issued/adopted on their basis, may be in the ownership of a municipality.
The right of ownership of land does not confer the right to use the surface waters or groundwater existing on or flowing through that land, except for the use under the rule of general water use as provided for in Article 15 of this Law.
Article 9. Identification, Establishment of Boundaries, and Demarcation of Water Bodies
A water body is the basic unit of water resources management, the identification and establishment of boundaries of which, as well as the analysis of the characteristics of the river basin/basin district, shall be carried out by the Ministry.
The main characteristics for the identification of a water body are its geographical description, hydrological parameters, ecological status, and water use.
The identification of a water body and the establishment of its boundaries shall be carried out in accordance with the "Rule on the Identification of Water Bodies and Establishment of their Boundaries," which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
Article 10. Land of a Water Body
The land of a water body shall be considered:
a) land occupied by a water body (except for groundwater), by hydrotechnical and other water management structures;
b) land designated as a protection zone for a water body (water protection strip, sanitary protection zone).
The land of a water body is used for the construction and operation of structures (including main pipelines) that ensure the satisfaction of drinking, domestic, medicinal, resort, and other necessary needs for water, as well as agricultural, industrial, fishery, energy, transport, and other needs.
The land of a water body may be transferred into the ownership (except for the bed of a natural lake, the riverbed, and also the first belt of the sanitary protection zone of a water supply water body (taking into account the exception defined by the Law of Georgia "On State Property")) and use of natural and legal persons, subject to the protection of the restrictions established by the legislation of Georgia.
The implementation of economic activities on the land of a water body is permitted, taking into account the restrictions established by the legislation of Georgia.
The rule for the use of the land of a water body is determined by this Law and other legislative and subordinate normative acts of Georgia.
Article 11. Protection Zone of a Water Body
The protection zone of a water body (water protection zone) includes:
a) a water protection strip – a territory adjacent to a water body, on which a special regime for domestic use, use of natural resources, and implementation of other economic activities is established. The water protection strip includes, among others, the coastal strips of a river, lake, reservoir, and the Black Sea, and the alienation strips of main canals and other canals;
b) a sanitary protection zone – a territory located around the abstraction of drinking water, medicinal mineral water, from an underground or surface source (drinking water supply facilities), on which a special regime for domestic use, use of natural resources, and implementation of other economic (including resort-balneological) activities is established.
The rule for establishing the boundary of the water protection strip of a water body, including the list of permitted activities within this strip, and the conditions and regime for carrying out activities, shall be determined by the technical regulation "On the Water Protection Strip," which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
The rule for the creation of the sanitary protection zone of a drinking water supply facility, the establishment of its boundaries, the division of its belts, and the list of activities permitted within them and the rules for carrying out such activities shall be developed by the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia and approved by the Government of Georgia.
Chapter IV
Water Use
Article 12. Object and Types of Water Use
The object of water use is the water bodies defined by this Law.
Water use includes:
a) general water use;
b) special water use.
Article 13. General Conditions for Water Use
The following conditions must be observed during water use:
a) for drinking and domestic water supply for the population, surface water or/and groundwater that is reliably protected from pollution and littering must be used, the quality of which, in its natural state or after appropriate treatment, corresponds to the norms established by the legislation of Georgia;
b) industrial, agricultural, and other enterprises that generate wastewater containing polluting substances and are subject to the permitting regime for water discharge into a surface water body, as provided by this Law, must be equipped with a wastewater treatment facility (device) appropriate to the specifics of the enterprise, in order to protect water bodies and catchment basins from pollution;
c) a natural and/or legal person, when driving livestock, is obliged to protect the water supply sources located on the livestock driving route from pollution and depletion, and water management structures and devices from damage;
d) a water user is obliged, when a representative of the relevant authorized body is carrying out the functions defined by the legislation of Georgia, taking into account safety norms and existing technical regulations, to allow them unhindered access to their territory and, upon request, to provide them with all necessary information and documentation;
e) in cases of exceptional low water levels, an emergency situation on a water body, the danger of an epidemic and/or epizootic, a natural disaster, during military operations, and/or in other extreme cases or other cases provided for by the legislation of Georgia, the rights of water users may be restricted for the purpose of protecting the life and/or health of the population, as well as in the interests of other water users;
f) a natural and/or legal person is obliged, for the purpose of preventing the pollution of surface water and groundwater, to carry out the moistening and fertilization of the soil on agricultural land by observing the permissible norms for irrigation and for the application of nutrients to the soil; also, for the purpose of preventing the development of eutrophication in a surface water body, not to allow the entry of organic substances and the erosion of the soils of agricultural lands.
Article 14. Supplying the Population with Water for Drinking and Domestic Purposes
Water resources shall be made available for use primarily to satisfy the drinking and/or domestic needs of the population. Within the framework of the right of the population to access water, the population shall be provided with safe water continuously, in sufficient quantity, and at an affordable price.
Priorities for water use for other purposes shall be determined by the river basin/basin district management plans.
For the purpose of informing the public, the Ministry shall develop a mechanism for providing information to the public and shall publish a report every 3 years on the state of water intended for human consumption. The content of the report on the state of water intended for human consumption shall be determined by order of the Minister.
The quality of water intended for human consumption shall be determined by the technical regulation "On the Quality of Water Intended for Human Consumption," which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
Article 15. General Water Use
General water use, with surface water and/or groundwater, is carried out:
a) for non-commercial purposes, including the satisfaction of personal (drinking, domestic, recreational, health, and other similar) needs, without the use of such a structure and/or device that has a significant impact on the state of the water body from which water abstraction is planned, and/or on the water protection strip;
b) for the purpose of firefighting and carrying out emergency-rescue work.
General water use is carried out without a special water use permit, in compliance with the requirements established by the legislation of Georgia.
General water use is free of charge.
General water use may be restricted for the purpose of protecting the life and/or health of the population.
In the event of circumstances endangering the life and/or health of the population, municipalities, on the basis of this Law, within the framework of their delegated powers, in accordance with the legislation of Georgia:
a) in coordination with the Ministry and the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia, shall determine the places where bathing is prohibited;
b) in coordination with the Ministry and the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia, shall determine the places where the abstraction of water for drinking and/or domestic needs, for watering livestock, and/or for fishing is prohibited.
A municipality is obliged, upon the establishment of the prohibitions provided for in paragraph 5 of this Article, to publish, or in another form (distribution of information notices, distribution of information sheets to citizens, placement of an information sign near the relevant water body, and others), to make available to the population information about the possibility of general water use and the conditions of its restriction.
Article 16. Special Water Use of a Surface Water Body
Special water use of a surface water body is water use with the application of such a structure and/or device that has a significant impact on the state of the water body from which water abstraction is planned. A significant impact on the state of a water body is considered to be:
a) water abstraction from a surface water body in an amount of more than 15 m³ per day (except for the case provided for in sub-paragraph "b" of the first paragraph of Article 15 of this Law);
b) the discharge of wastewater containing polluting substances into a surface water body in any amount.
Special water use of a surface water body is carried out in accordance with this Law on the basis of the following special water use permits:
a) a permit for water abstraction from a surface water body;
b) a permit for water discharge into a surface water body;
c) a combined permit for water use of a surface water body.
A combined permit for water use of a surface water body grants its holder the right to carry out the activities defined in sub-paragraphs "a" and "b" of paragraph 2 of this Article.
A person carrying out an activity subject to environmental impact assessment according to the Environmental Assessment Code shall receive the right to special water use on the basis of an environmental decision, without obtaining the water use permit defined in paragraph 2 of this Article. Specifically, in the case where a person carrying out an activity subject to environmental impact assessment needs the special water use provided for by this Law, they are obliged, for the purpose of obtaining the right to special water use, to submit to the authorized body, together with the application for an environmental decision, the documentation provided for in Article 17 of this Law. The term and conditions of special water use by a person carrying out an activity subject to environmental impact assessment shall be determined in accordance with Article 20 of this Law and by the environmental decision provided for by the Environmental Assessment Code. Furthermore, after the expiration of the term of water use determined by the environmental decision, the person carrying out the activity is obliged to obtain a special water use permit, in the manner prescribed by this Law.
The obligation to obtain the special water use permit defined by this Law also extends to a person holding an environmental decision, for whom the conditions of water abstraction and/or water discharge change after the issuance of the relevant environmental decision, or who needs water abstraction from a surface water body, in such a way that the production technology and/or operating conditions of the activity are not changed.
If, after the issuance of an environmental decision for an activity, the conditions of water abstraction and/or water discharge change for the person carrying out the activity, or they need water abstraction from a surface water body, which causes a change in the production technology and/or operating conditions of the activity, the person carrying out the activity is obliged, within the framework of the activity screening procedure defined by Article 7 of the Environmental Assessment Code, to submit to the authorized body the documentation provided for in Article 17 of this Law, which is necessary for obtaining a special water use permit.
A person carrying out an activity subject to an integrated environmental permit in accordance with the Law of Georgia "On Industrial Emissions" shall receive the right to special water use on the basis of an integrated environmental permit, without obtaining the water use permit defined in paragraph 2 of this Article. Specifically, in the case where a person carrying out an activity subject to an integrated environmental permit, as defined by the Law of Georgia "On Industrial Emissions," needs the special water use provided for by this Law, they are obliged, for the purpose of obtaining the right to water use, to submit to the authorized body an application for an integrated environmental permit, which reflects the information provided for in Article 17 of this Law. The term and conditions of water use by a person carrying out an activity subject to an integrated environmental permit shall be determined in accordance with Article 20 of this Law and by the integrated environmental permit. Furthermore, after the expiration of the term of water use determined by the integrated environmental permit, the person carrying out the activity is obliged to obtain a special water use permit, in the manner prescribed by this Law.
The obligation to obtain the special water use permits defined by this Law also extends to a person holding an integrated environmental permit, for whom the conditions of water abstraction and/or water discharge change after the issuance of the integrated environmental permit for the activity, or who needs water abstraction from a surface water body, provided that the said change does not constitute a substantial change in the production technology and/or operating conditions of the activity, in accordance with the Law of Georgia "On Industrial Emissions."
If, after the issuance of an integrated environmental permit, the conditions of water abstraction and/or water discharge change, or water abstraction from a surface water body is needed, which causes a change in the production technology and/or operating conditions of the activity, the person carrying out the activity is obliged to reflect the information provided for in Article 17 of this Law in the application for a planned change as defined by the Law of Georgia "On Industrial Emissions." Furthermore, the term and conditions of water use shall be determined in accordance with Article 20 of this Law and by the relevant decision.

Article 17. Rule and Conditions for the Issuance of a Special Water Use Permit
A special water use permit for a surface water body shall be issued in accordance with Chapter VII of the Law of Georgia "On Licenses and Permits" and Chapter VI of the General Administrative Code of Georgia, except in cases provided for by this Law.
A special water use permit for a surface water body shall be issued by:
a) the Ministry;
b) the municipality (for water resources of local importance).
An application for a water abstraction permit from a surface water body, in addition to the documents provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Licenses and Permits," must be accompanied by:
a) a brief technical (technological) description of the activity;
b) water use parameters;
c) a schematic plan of the water use system (if any);
d) a site plan of the location, indicating the coordinates of the water abstraction points and the outline of the watercourses (a flow of water running according to the slope of the relief in natural or artificial channels, such as a river, stream, gully, ravine, or canal);
e) a hydrological and qualitative (physical-chemical and biological) description of the water body intended for water use.
For obtaining a water discharge permit into a surface water body, in addition to the documents provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Licenses and Permits," a project of norms for the maximum permissible discharge (hereinafter – MPD norms) of polluting substances to be discharged into the surface water body along with the wastewater must be submitted, which shall include:
a) a hydrological and qualitative (hydrochemical and hydrobiological) description of the water body intended for water use;
b) brief information about the water user (enterprise capacity, technological processes, description of raw materials used and products released, operating regime, etc.);
c) a description of the use of water at the enterprise, a description of the wastewater sources indicating the GPS coordinates of the discharge point (in the UTM WGS 1984 coordinate system), and their quantitative and qualitative characteristics;
d) the capacity of the treatment facilities and the treatment parameters;
e) the calculation of the MPD norms;
f) measures necessary to prevent the accidental discharge of wastewater;
g) the control of compliance with the MPD norms (methods for accounting for water use and discharge, control parameters for wastewater quality, and the frequency of sampling);
h) a plan of measures necessary for compliance with the MPD norms.
For obtaining a combined permit for water use of a surface water body, in addition to the documents provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Licenses and Permits," the information provided for in paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Article must be submitted.
A municipality shall issue a combined permit for water use of a surface water body only if both the water abstraction and the water discharge relate to water resources of local importance (except for activities subject to environmental impact assessment and activities subject to an integrated environmental permit). In other cases, the combined permit for water use of a surface water body shall be issued by the Ministry.
A special water use permit shall be issued within a period of 45 calendar days. When transferring water resources for use, taking into account the priority of satisfying the drinking and/or domestic needs of the population, the Ministry shall, upon issuance of the permit, verify whether the municipality plans to abstract water from the surface water body indicated in the application of the person interested in water use, for the purpose of satisfying the drinking and/or domestic needs of the population, and if such a plan exists, it shall take this circumstance into account when making a decision.
A special water use permit for a surface water body shall be issued taking into account the relevant river basin/basin district management plan and the environmental flow of the river, in accordance with the methodology for assessing the environmental flow of rivers, which is approved by order of the Minister.
A special water use permit for a surface water body in the border zone and border strip, as defined by the Law of Georgia "On the State Border of Georgia" and relevant normative acts, shall be issued in agreement with the relevant authorized body of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia.
The rule and conditions for the issuance of special water use permits shall be determined by the decree of the Government of Georgia "On Approving the Rule and Conditions for the Issuance of a Special Water Use Permit for Surface Water Bodies."
Article 18. Grounds for Refusal to Issue a Special Water Use Permit
A special water use permit for a surface water body shall not be issued if:
a) the requirements of the Law of Georgia "On Licenses and Permits" and/or other legislative and subordinate normative acts of Georgia are violated;
b) the information submitted for obtaining the water use permit is not true;
c) a person interested in discharging wastewater containing polluting substances into a surface water body does not have an appropriate device (wastewater treatment facility, installation) that ensures the prevention of water pollution, littering, or other negative impacts on it;
d) the issuance of the permit contradicts the requirements established by the legislation of Georgia.
Article 19. Appealing the Refusal to Issue a Special Water Use Permit
The decision of the body issuing a special water use permit on the refusal to issue the permit may be appealed to a superior administrative body (official) or in court.
Article 20. Term of Validity of a Special Water Use Permit
Special water use permits for a surface water body shall be issued for a term not exceeding 5 years, except for the exceptions provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article.
A special water use permit for a surface water body, taking into account the relevant river basin/basin district management plan, shall be issued:
a) for the water use of irrigation systems – for a term not exceeding 25 years;
b) for the supply of the population with drinking water – for a term not exceeding 30 years;
c) for the water use of a hydroelectric power station and a thermal power station – for a term not exceeding 49 years (according to the term provided for in the relevant agreement concluded with the state).
The authority issuing a water use permit is authorized, on the basis of an analysis of state monitoring data for at least the last 10 years, in the event of a significant change in the quantitative indicators of water caused by natural conditions against the background of climate change, to review the issued water use permit and to amend it.
Chapter V
Water Resources Management System
Article 21. Water Resources Management System
The water resources management system integrates the mechanisms for planning and managing the protection and use of water resources at the national level and at the river basin/basin district level.
The management of water resources is carried out in accordance with the principles of basin management.
Article 22. Determination of a River Basin/Basin District
A river basin/basin district shall be determined by the decree of the Government of Georgia "On Approving the Boundaries of River Basins/Basin Districts."
The determination of a river basin/basin district is carried out in compliance with the following rules:
a) any surface water body, groundwater, and coastal waters must belong to a specific river basin or basin district;
b) a river basin may, together with another river basin, be determined as one basin district and be named after the main rivers of these basins;
c) groundwater distributed within the boundaries of a river basin belongs to the said basin;
d) if the location of groundwater does not exactly coincide with the location of a river basin, it must be identified and associated with the nearest or most appropriate basin;
e) the attribution of coastal waters is made to the nearest basin to them.
Article 23. Mechanism for Planning and Managing Water Resources
The basis for the planning and management of water resources at the river basin/basin district level is the river basin/basin district management plan.
The river basin/basin district management plan shall be approved by the Government of Georgia upon the submission of the Ministry.
The river basin/basin district management plan is approved for a period of 6 years and is updated every 6 years.
The procedure for the development, review, and approval of the river basin/basin district management plan shall be established by the Government of Georgia.
Article 24. Development of the River Basin/Basin District Management Plan
The Ministry shall organize the development of the draft river basin/basin district management plan and its public review.
The river basin/basin district management plan must take into account:
a) an analysis of the characteristics of the integrated management basin territorial unit of the river basin/basin district (including a description based on the results of the study of the characteristics, which for surface waters includes the boundaries of water bodies, the typology of surface waters, reference conditions, and for groundwater – the location and boundaries of the groundwater);
b) a description of the significant anthropogenic pressures and impacts on the status of surface water and groundwater bodies (including the assessment of pollution from point sources, the assessment of pollution from diffuse sources – including a brief description of the land use scheme), the assessment of pressure on the quantitative status of water – including the assessment of water abstraction, and an analysis of other impacts of human activity on the status of water;
c) a list of zones at risk of negative impact and a risk management program;
d) a map reflecting the boundaries of protected zones;
e) a map of the monitoring network developed for the purpose of establishing ecological status, which should also reflect the results of those monitoring programs according to which the status was established;
f) a list of environmental objectives established for surface water and groundwater bodies, as well as for water bodies in protected zones, including information on cases where exceptions to the establishment of environmental objectives have been permitted and the relevant information associated with it;
g) a brief review of the economic analysis of water use (including the identification of the most cost-effective measures related to water use, which should be included in the program of measures, and others);
h) a review of the program of measures established for the purpose of achieving environmental objectives;
i) a list and brief description of other programs and management plans developed within the territorial unit of the river basin/basin district, which have or may have an impact on the water bodies within the basin territorial unit;
j) information on the public reviews and consultations conducted during the development stage of the river basin/basin district management plan and the reflection of their results in the plan;
k) information about the river basin/basin district management body and its local representation, as well as information about the contact person and the procedure for requesting basic documents and this documentation.
The program of actions/measures for the implementation of the river basin/basin district management plan constitutes an integral part of the plan, which must define the organizational, financial, and material-technical aspects of the plan's implementation. The methodologies for developing the individual elements of the river basin/basin district management plan shall be approved by order of the Minister.
Article 25. Public Participation in the Process of Developing the River Basin/Basin District Management Plan
The process of developing the river basin/basin district management plan is public. The public has the right, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Georgia, to participate in this process.
After the development of the draft river basin/basin district management plan, the draft plan shall be reviewed by the relevant basin management consultative-coordination council, created on a territorial principle, in accordance with the rules defined by the decrees of the Government of Georgia "On the Procedure for the Development, Review, and Approval of Basin Management Plans" and "On the Creation and Rules of Activity of Basin Management Consultative-Coordination Councils."
Basin management consultative-coordination councils are advisory bodies established with the Ministry, the purpose of which is to ensure the cooperation of state agencies and private entities for the protection and sustainable use of water resources in the territory of the relevant basin district.
The composition of the basin management consultative-coordination council includes employees of the Ministry and other competent bodies provided for in Article 6 of this Law (including their local territorial bodies), representatives of the relevant municipalities, as well as representatives of organizations carrying out activities in the territory of the relevant river basin district (water supply companies, hydropower generation companies, etc.) that have a significant impact on the state of water resources, large water consumers, water user associations (if any), and representatives of other interested organizations.
The composition of the basin management consultative-coordination councils shall be approved by the Minister.
The Ministry shall ensure the publication of the information defined in paragraph 7 of this Article concerning the river basin/basin district, to make it accessible to the public for the purpose of receiving comments.
The Ministry is obliged to:
a) in accordance with paragraph 6 of this Article, publish the following information:
a.a) the schedule and work program necessary for the creation and updating of the river basin/basin district management plan, with an indication of the issues on which public review will be held;
a.b) the rule for the public review of the draft river basin/basin district management plan and the draft river basin/basin district management plan;
b) ensure:
b.a) the accessibility (upon request) of the main documents and information used during the development of the draft river basin/basin district management plan;
b.b) the arrangement of the public review of the draft river basin/basin district management plan.
After the review of the draft river basin/basin district management plan by the basin management consultative-coordination council, the Ministry shall ensure that a strategic environmental assessment of the draft plan is carried out, in accordance with Chapter III (Strategic Environmental Assessment) of the Environmental Assessment Code.
The requirements of this Article also apply to the updated river basin/basin district management plan. The updated plan must also include a brief review of those measures that were defined in the previous plan but were not implemented, as well as a brief description of changes and additions, an assessment of progress in achieving environmental objectives, including monitoring results for the period of the previous plan (in map form), and an explanation of the cases where the achievement of the environmental objectives provided for by the plan was not possible.
Article 26. Classification of Water Bodies
The classification of water bodies is carried out according to their ecological status.
In the process of classifying a surface water body, its quantitative, biological, hydromorphological, and physical-chemical indicators must be taken into account, and in the case of a groundwater body – its geological-hydrological, quantitative, physical-chemical, and qualitative indicators. These indicators determine the status of surface water and groundwater.
The differentiation of an artificial water body and a heavily modified surface water body is based on the characteristics of the surface water to which they are most similar.
Based on the ecological status (which is determined by the biological, hydromorphological, and physical-chemical indicators of the water body), a surface water body is classified as a body with the following status:
a) high;
b) good;
c) moderate (average);
d) poor;
e) very poor.
Based on the chemical status, a surface water body is classified as a body with the following status:
a) good;
b) poor.
Based on the status of groundwater, a groundwater body is classified as a body with the following status:
a) a groundwater body with good quantitative status;
b) a groundwater body with poor quantitative status;
c) a groundwater body with good chemical status;
d) a groundwater body with poor chemical status.
A heavily modified water body and/or an artificial water body is classified according to its ecological potential as follows:
a) having high ecological potential;
b) having good ecological potential;
c) having moderate ecological potential;
d) having poor ecological potential;
e) having very poor ecological potential.
The criteria for the classification of water bodies are determined by the "Methodology for the Classification of the Ecological Status and Ecological Potential of Water Bodies," which is approved by the Minister.
For all types of surface water bodies, typical background hydromorphological, physical-chemical, and biological conditions are defined, which correspond to a high ecological status, or in the case of a heavily modified water body and/or an artificial water body – the relevant indicators of a water body of the same type with high ecological potential, which constitutes the basis for establishing a water quality standard. The review of the background indicators of a surface water body with high ecological potential is carried out every 6 years.
The surface water quality standard is the limit concentration of a specific pollutant or group of pollutants in water or sediment, the exceeding of which is unacceptable from the point of view of protecting human health and the environment.
Surface water quality standards are determined by the decree of the Government of Georgia "On Approving the Surface Water Quality Standards."
Article 27. Target Indicators for the Qualitative State of Surface Water and Groundwater
For each surface water body characterized by an average, poor, or very poor status, target indicators for the status of the water are established, except in cases where the water body is subject to strong anthropogenic impact, or its natural state is such that it is impossible to achieve a good water status, or it requires disproportionate costs. In such a case, it is permissible to set less stringent environmental objectives and to implement measures to prevent further deterioration of the water status.
The target indicator for each surface water body is its "good water status," including "good ecological status" and "good chemical status," and for a heavily modified water body and/or an artificial water body – "good ecological potential" and "good chemical status."
For each groundwater body characterized by a poor quantitative and qualitative status, target indicators for the status of the water are established.
The target indicator for each groundwater body is its good quantitative and chemical status.
Article 28. Programs of Measures for the Maintenance and Improvement of Water Quality
The program of measures for the maintenance and improvement of water quality includes:
a) measures for the progressive reduction of pollution and the cessation of the discharge of polluting substances into surface waters;
b) measures for the achievement of the target indicators by the water body;
c) measures for the maintenance of the status of high-status surface waters and heavily modified or artificial water bodies with high ecological potential;
d) in the case of achieving the target indicators, measures for the maintenance of the water status, and, in some cases, for its further improvement up to a high ecological status;
e) special measures to reverse any significant and sustained upward trend in the pollution of groundwater caused by human activity;
f) measures for the maintenance of the good quantitative and chemical status of groundwater;
g) measures for the implementation of existing water protection requirements;
h) measures for the efficient use of water;
i) measures for the protection of drinking water quality;
j) measures for the control of point and diffuse sources of pollution;
k) other measures aimed at preventing and eliminating significant impacts.
In the event that several possible target indicators exist for a specific water body, measures shall be planned for the achievement of the priority target indicator among them.
Chapter VI
Protection and Restoration of Water Resources
Article 29. Main Requirements for the Protection of Water Resources
For the purpose of protecting water resources and protecting them from negative impacts, it is prohibited to:
a) discharge polluting substances together with wastewater into surface water and groundwater bodies, unless the conditions established by the permit for water discharge into a surface water body are met. Any direct discharge of polluting substances into groundwater;
b) dispose of and/or bury waste in a water body and its protection zone;
c) fill a reservoir before the measures provided for the preparation of its basin are implemented;
d) abstract surface water and groundwater if this may cause the water level to drop below the permissible level and/or the depletion of the water body (abstraction of groundwater if this may cause an imbalance in the groundwater body);
e) abstract water from a river, construct/operate hydrotechnical and industrial facilities, arrange/operate irrigation systems, and abstract water for other purposes without taking into account the environmental flow of the river;
f) litter and/or pollute water with oil, timber, chemical products, petroleum, mineral and organic fertilizers, pesticides, and other product losses from water transport, pipelines, floating and other structures on a water body;
g) float timber.
h) carry out any activity that may damage water intake structures, worsen water quality, and/or reduce water flow;
i) use water without taking into account sanitary protection zones.
Article 30. Requirements related to the Treatment of Urban Wastewater
The norms for the discharge of urban wastewater into a surface water body and the criteria for determining sensitive areas at risk of impact from urban wastewater are established by the technical regulation "Conditions for the Discharge of Urban and Industrial Wastewater into Surface Water Bodies," which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
The quality of industrial wastewater entering the urban wastewater (sewerage) system and treatment facility must, at a minimum, meet such conditions and be in such a state that it:
a) does not pose a threat to the health of the personnel servicing the said systems and treatment facilities;
b) does not cause damage to the said system, treatment facility, and related equipment;
c) ensures the uninterrupted operation of the wastewater treatment facility, compliance with the technological regime of treatment, and the decontamination of sludge;
d) ensures compliance with the conditions for the discharge of urban wastewater and the prevention of negative impacts on the environment.
In the event that the conditions provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article are not met, appropriate pre-treatment of the industrial wastewater is necessary.
The technical conditions for the discharge of wastewater into the urban wastewater (sewerage) system are determined by the technical regulation "Conditions for the Discharge and Reception of Wastewater into the Wastewater (Sewerage) System and the Maximum Permissible Norms for Polluting Substances," which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
Chapter VII
Control of the Protection and Use of Water Resources
Article 31. Bodies Authorized to Carry out Control and the Scope of Control in the Sphere of Protection and Use of Water Resources
Control in the sphere of protection and use of water resources, within their competence, shall be carried out by:
a) the state sub-agency of the Ministry – the Department of Environmental Supervision (hereinafter – the Department);
b) the legal entity of public law under the state control of the Ministry – the National Food Agency (hereinafter – the National Food Agency);
c) the legal entity of public law within the system of the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia – the National Agency of Mineral Resources (hereinafter – the National Agency of Mineral Resources);
d) the legal entity of public law within the system of the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development of Georgia – the State Agency of Oil and Gas (hereinafter – the State Agency of Oil and Gas);
e) the municipality.
The Department shall carry out:
a) control over the fulfillment of the conditions of permits for water abstraction from a surface water body, water discharge into a surface water body, and combined water use of a surface water body;
b) the prevention, detection, and suppression of facts of illegal use of water resources, within its competence;
c) the prevention, detection, and suppression of facts of pollution and/or littering of water resources.
The National Food Agency shall carry out state control over drinking water quality and provide information to consumers about the qualitative state of drinking water.
The National Agency of Mineral Resources shall carry out state control in the sphere of the use of groundwater.
The State Agency of Oil and Gas shall carry out the disposal and control of water separated from fluids containing hydrocarbons.
The municipality shall carry out control over the use of water resources of local importance.

Chapter VIII
State System of Water Resources Monitoring and Water Use Accounting
Article 32. State System of Water Resources Monitoring
The state system of water resources monitoring is a unified system of regular observation and data analysis of the hydrological, hydromorphological, hydrogeological, chemical, and ecological state of surface water and groundwater bodies, and their quantitative and qualitative characteristics, the purpose of which is to obtain information on the state of water bodies, their interaction with the environment (natural and anthropogenic), the natural and anthropogenic processes occurring in the river basin, and hazardous and catastrophic events, as well as to analyze, assess, and forecast risk factors.
The state system of water resources monitoring includes a unified national network of monitoring, through which hydrological, hydrochemical, hydrobiological, hydromorphological, and hydrogeological monitoring programs are carried out.
The state monitoring of water shall be carried out by the legal entity of public law within the system of the Ministry – the National Environmental Agency (hereinafter – the National Environmental Agency), which, upon the request of interested parties, shall ensure the provision of quantitative and qualitative observation data to them. The National Environmental Agency shall regularly disseminate hydrological forecasts and warnings about expected natural disasters; it shall also regularly provide the public and interested parties with information about the level of pollution of water bodies.
The state water monitoring plan shall be developed annually by the National Environmental Agency and approved by the Minister.
The rule for the planning and implementation of water resources monitoring shall be determined by a decree of the Government of Georgia.
Article 33. State System of Water Use Accounting
The water use of an entrepreneurial natural person and a legal person is subject to state accounting if one or both of the following conditions exist:
a) during this water use, water is abstracted from a water body in a volume of more than 1 m³ per day;
b) during this water use, wastewater is discharged into a water body.
The state accounting of water use shall be carried out by the Ministry.
The state accounting of water use is carried out in an electronic format.
The rule and conditions for conducting the state accounting of water use are established by the "Rule for Conducting the State Accounting of Water Use," which is approved by the Minister.
Wells for the extraction of fresh drinking groundwater are also subject to accounting in accordance with the technical regulation – "Rule for the Accounting of Wells for the Purpose of Extracting Fresh Drinking Groundwater," which is approved by the Government of Georgia.
Chapter IX
Flood Risk Management
Article 34. Flood Risk Management
The National Environmental Agency shall, once every 6 years, carry out a preliminary flood risk assessment for all river basin districts and shall identify the areas where a potential significant flood risk exists.
The National Environmental Agency shall prepare flood hazard maps, and the state sub-agency within the sphere of governance of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia – the Emergency Management Service (hereinafter – the Emergency Management Service) – shall prepare flood risk maps for all areas identified as areas of potential significant flood risk. These maps shall define the zones with a medium probability of flooding (at least one event in 100 years), and low and high probability events. In the zones of river basins that are marked as flood risk zones, the number of the population at potential risk and the potential risk of damage to economic activity and the environment must also be indicated.
The flood risk management plan is prepared in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Georgia. The flood risk management plan must take into account issues of flood prevention, protection, and preparedness, including flood forecasting and early warning systems. The flood risk management plans must be reflected in the river basin/basin district management plan.
In agreement with the Emergency Management Service, the competent state agencies shall develop flood risk management plans. The flood risk management plans are approved in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Georgia.
The functions and competences of state agencies in matters of preparedness, response, prevention, and early stage recovery work related to flood-related emergency situations are determined by the legislation of Georgia.
The Government of Georgia shall issue a decree "On the Assessment of Areas at Potential Flood Risk."
Chapter X
Economic Mechanisms of Water Resources Management
Article 35. Economic Mechanisms for the Sustainable Use and Protection of Water
The economic mechanisms for the sustainable use and protection of water are based on the "paid nature of use" principle defined by the Law of Georgia "On Environmental Protection."
For the implementation of the "paid nature of use" principle, the environmental and water resources use costs associated with water use will be taken into account when establishing the fee for the use of natural resources in accordance with the requirement of paragraph 3 of this Article.
In the case of water abstraction from a surface water body in the form of special water use, the water user shall pay a fee for the use of natural resources, the amount and payment rule of which are determined by the Law of Georgia "On Fees for the Use of Natural Resources."
The amount of the fee provided for in paragraph 3 of this Article must ensure the efficient use and sustainable management of water resources and, accordingly, the implementation of environmental objectives.
The obligation to pay the fee for the use of natural resources provided for in paragraph 3 of this Article also extends to persons carrying out activities subject to environmental impact assessment who have an environmental decision and/or an integrated environmental permit.
Chapter XI
Liability for Violation of Water Legislation
Article 36. Liability for Violation of the Law
Liability for the violation of this Law shall be determined by the legislation of Georgia.
The imposition of the liability provided for in the first paragraph of this Article shall not release the offender from the environmental liability established by the legislation of Georgia. Natural and legal persons are obliged to compensate for the damage caused to the environment by the violation of this Law, in accordance with the legislation of Georgia on environmental liability.
Chapter XII
Transitional Provisions
Article 37. Normative Acts to be Adopted (Issued) and Measures to be Implemented in Connection with this Law
By September 1, 2026, the Government of Georgia shall ensure the adoption of the following legal acts:
a) "Rule on the Identification of Water Bodies and Establishment of their Boundaries";
b) "On Approving the Boundaries of River Basins/Basin Districts";
c) Technical regulation "On the Quality of Water Intended for Human Consumption";
d) "On the Procedure for the Development, Review, and Approval of Basin Management Plans";
e) "Rule for the Planning and Implementation of Water Resources Monitoring";
f) "On the Assessment of Areas at Potential Flood Risk";
g) Technical regulation "On the Water Protection Strip";
h) "On Approving the Rule for Establishing the Sanitary Protection Zone of a Drinking Water Supply Facility and for Carrying out Activities within its Scope";
i) "On Approving the Surface Water Quality Standards";
j) Technical regulation "Conditions for the Discharge of Urban and Industrial Wastewater into Surface Water Bodies";
k) Technical regulation "Conditions for the Discharge and Reception of Wastewater into the Wastewater (Sewerage) System and the Maximum Permissible Norms for Polluting Substances";
l) "On Approving the Rule and Conditions for the Issuance of a Special Water Use Permit for Surface Water Bodies";
m) Technical regulation – "Rule for the Accounting of Wells for the Purpose of Extracting Fresh Drinking Groundwater";
n) "On the Creation and Rules of Activity of Basin Management Consultative-Coordination Councils".
By September 1, 2026, the Minister shall ensure:
a) the issuance of the order "On the Content of the Report on the State of Water Intended for Human Consumption";
b) the approval of the relevant methodologies regulating the sphere of water resources management;
c) the identification of zones polluted or at risk of pollution by nitrates in surface waters and the determination of zones vulnerable to nitrates;
d) the determination of the rules of good agricultural practice for zones vulnerable to nitrates and the development of the relevant action plans;
e) the approval of the "Rule for Conducting the State Accounting of Water Use";
f) the identification of zones polluted or at risk of pollution by nitrates in groundwater and the determination of zones vulnerable to nitrates;
g) the identification of sensitive areas and agglomerations at risk of impact from urban wastewater.
By September 1, 2027, the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia shall ensure:
a) a survey of the wastewater (sewerage) systems of cities and villages;
b) the development of comprehensive measures to improve the state of the wastewater (sewerage) systems of cities and villages, to protect water resources from pollution by sewerage wastewater.
From January 1, 2026, the Ministry and the agencies within its system shall ensure the creation of the necessary structural subdivisions and/or the announcement of competitions for vacant positions of officials to be appointed for the uninterrupted fulfillment of the functions assigned to them by this Law, in accordance with the relevant measures provided for by the legislation of Georgia.
The legal acts adopted/issued on the basis of the Law of Georgia "On Water" of October 16, 1997 (Parliamentary Gazette, No. 44, 11.11.1997, p. 123) shall retain their legal force until they are declared invalid or until the relevant legal acts are adopted/issued on the basis of this Law, provided they do not contradict the requirements of this Law.
Article 38. Transitional Provision regarding the Obtaining of a Special Water Use Permit by Persons Holding an Environmental Decision
A person for whom an environmental decision has been issued before the entry into force of the permitting regime for special water use provided for by this Law shall carry out special water use in accordance with the conditions established by the environmental decision. Furthermore, in the case of a change in the conditions of water abstraction and/or water discharge, and/or the need for water abstraction from a surface water body, in such a way that the production technology and/or operating conditions of the activity are not changed, the person carrying out the activity must obtain a special water use permit in the manner prescribed by this Law.
If the conditions of water abstraction and/or water discharge change for the person carrying out the activity, and/or they need water abstraction from a surface water body, which causes a change in the production technology and/or operating conditions of the activity, the person carrying out the activity is obliged, within the framework of the activity screening procedure defined by Article 7 of the Environmental Assessment Code, to submit to the authorized body the documentation provided for in Article 17 of this Law, which is necessary for obtaining a water use permit. The term and conditions of water use shall be determined in accordance with Article 20 of this Law and by the relevant decision.
Article 39. Transitional Provision related to the Agreed Technical Conditions for Water Abstraction from a Surface Water Body and to a Person Carrying out Water Discharge into a Surface Water Body
A person who, on the basis of a decree of the Government of Georgia "On Approving the Environmental Technical Regulations," has agreed technical conditions for water abstraction from a surface water body and carries out water use in the manner established by the agreed technical conditions, does not need a special water use permit as defined by this Law until the expiration of the term of the agreement on the technical conditions for water abstraction from a surface water body.
In the case of a change in the agreed technical conditions for water abstraction from a surface water body, the person carrying out the activity must obtain a special water use permit in the manner prescribed by this Law.
A person whose activity is not subject to environmental impact assessment and who carries out the discharge of wastewater containing polluting substances into a surface water body is obliged to obtain the relevant special water use permit by September 1, 2027.
Article 40. Transitional Provision related to the Obtaining of a Water Discharge Permit into a Surface Water Body by Subjects Servicing Melioration Drainage Systems and Centralized Wastewater (Sewerage) Systems
The need to arrange structures and/or technical means for water discharge into surface water bodies by melioration drainage systems shall be determined by the authorized body/person, on the basis of a conclusion prepared based on the results of laboratory analyses submitted by the owner of the melioration drainage system.
The effect of sub-paragraph "b" of paragraph 2 of Article 16 of this Law (permit for water discharge into a surface water body) shall extend to existing, centralized wastewater (sewerage) systems from January 1, 2028.
Chapter XIII
Concluding Provisions
Article 41. Normative Act to be Declared Invalid
The Law of Georgia "On Water" of October 16, 1997 (Parliamentary Gazette, No. 44, 11.11.1997, p. 123) shall be declared invalid.
Article 42. Entry into Force of the Law
This Law, except for Articles 1–36, paragraph 5 of Article 37, and Articles 38–41 of this Law, shall enter into force upon its publication.
Articles 1–5, the first paragraph of Article 6, sub-paragraphs "a"–"gh," "sh," and "ch" of paragraph 2, paragraphs 3–7, sub-paragraphs "a" and "b" of paragraph 8 and paragraph 9 of Article 6, Article 7, the first and third paragraphs of Article 8, Articles 9–16, the first paragraph of Article 17, sub-paragraph "a" of paragraph 2, paragraphs 3–5 and 7–10 of Article 17, Articles 18–30, sub-paragraphs "a"–"d" of the first paragraph and paragraphs 2–5 of Article 31, Articles 32–34, the first, second, and fourth paragraphs of Article 35, Article 36, paragraph 5 of Article 37, and Articles 38–41 of this Law shall enter into force on September 1, 2026.
Sub-paragraph "y" of paragraph 2 of Article 6 and paragraphs 3 and 5 of Article 35 of this Law shall enter into force on September 1, 2027.
Sub-paragraph "g" of paragraph 8 of Article 6, paragraph 2 of Article 8, sub-paragraph "b" of paragraph 2 and paragraph 6 of Article 17, sub-paragraph "e" of the first paragraph and paragraph 6 of Article 31 of this Law shall enter into force on January 1, 2030.
President of Georgia
Salome Zourabichvili
Tbilisi,
June 30, 2023.
N3423-XIმს-Xგვ