

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
ACT 522
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACT 522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WATER RESOURCES COMMISSION ACT, 1996 
 
 
 
 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
 
 
 
Establishment and Functions of the Water Resources Commission 
 
 
SECTION 
 
 
 
I. Establishment of Water Resources Commission. 
 
 
2. 
Functions of the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
Composition of Board and Related Provisions 
 
 
3. 
Composition of the Board. 
 
 
 
4. 
Tenure of office of members. 
 
 
 
5. 
Filling of vacancies. 
 
 
 
6. 
Meetings of the Board. 
 
 
 
7. Commission to appoint 
committees. 
 
 
 
8. 
Allowances for members of the Board and committees. 
 
 
9. 
Executive Secretary to the Commission. 
 
 
10. 
Other staff of the Commission. 
 
 
II. Delegation of power of appointment. 
 
 
 
 
Regulation of Use of Water Resources 
 
 
12. 
Public water vested in President. 
 
 
 
13. 
Prohibition of use of water without authority. 
 
 
14. 
Use of water resources for domestic purposes. 
 
 
15. 
Enforcement notice. 
 
 
 
16. 
Grant of water right. 
 
 
 
17. 
Prohibition of transfer of water right. 
 
 
18. 
Creation of statutory Wayleaves and easement. 
 
 
19. 
Suspension or variation of water right. 
 
 
20. 
Termination or limitation of right where water is required for public purpose. 
 
 
21. 
Compensation on suspension or cancellation of water right. 
 
 
22. 
Water right to be terminated for breach of condition. 
 
 
23. 
Termination or limitation for non-use. 
 
 
24. 
Pollution of water. 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial and Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
 
25. 
Funds of the Commission. 
 
 
 
26. 
Accounts and audit. 
 
 
 
27. 
Annual report. 
 
 
 
28. 
Power to obtain information. 
 
 
 
29. 
Power to inspect works, etc. 
 
 
 
30. 
Power to require demolition of unlawful works. 
 
 
31. 
Minister to declare controlled area. 
 
VII-4001
(Issue I]


--- PAGE 2 ---

 
 
ACT 522 
Water Resources Commission Act, /996 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION 
32. Schemes for development of water resources in protected areas. 
33. Declaration of water emergency. 
34. Penalty for offences. 
35. Regulations. 
36. Transitional provisions. 
37. Interpretation. 
38. Repeal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACT 522 
WATER RESOURCES COMMISSION ACT, 19961 
 
AN ACT to establish a Water Resources Commission, to provide for its composition 
and functions on the regulation and management of the utilisation of water re-
sources in Ghana and for related matters. 
Establishment and Functions of the Water Resources Commission 
 1. Establishme
of Water Resources Commission 
nt . 
(I) There is established by this Act a Water Resources Commission. 
(2) The Commission is a body corporate with perpetual succession and a 
common 
seal and may sue and be sued in its corporate name. 
(3) The Commission may for and in connection with the performance of its functions 
purchase, hold, manage or dispose of movable or immovable property and may enter into 
the contracts and transactions that are reasonably related to its functions.
2. Functions of the Commission 
 
(I) The Commission is responsible for the regulation and management of the utilisation
        of water resources, and for the co-ordination of any policy in relation to them. 
 
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (I) of this section, the Commission shall 
(a) propose comprehensive plans for the utilisation, conservation, development 
 
and improvement of water resources; 
(b) initiate, control and co-ordinate activities connected with the development 
and utilisation of water resources; (c) grant water rights; 
(d) collect, collate, store and disseminate data or information on water re 
 
sources in Ghana; 
 
I. The Act was assented to on 30th December, 1996 and notified in the Gazelle on 31st December, 
1996. 
 
VII - 4002
[Issue I] 


--- PAGE 3 ---

 
 
ACT 522
 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
require water user agencies to undertake scientific investigations, experi-
ments or research into water resources in Ghana; 
monitor and evaluate programmes for the operation and maintenance of 
water resources; 
advise the Government on any matter likely to have an adverse effect on the 
water resources of Ghana; 
advise pollution control agencies in Ghana on matters concerning the man-
agement and control of pollution of water resources; and 
perform such other functions as are incidental to the foregoing. 
 
Composition of Board and Related Provisions 
3. Composition of the Board 
 
(1) The governing body of the Commission is a Board consisting of 
 
(a) the Chairman who shall not be a Minister or a Deputy Minister, 
            (b) one person representing each of the following: 
                      (i) the Ghana Water and Sewerage Corporation, 
                       (ii) Organisations producing potable water, 
 
(iii) the Hydrology Department of the Ministry of Works and Housing, 
 
(iv) the Volta River Authority, 
 
(v) the irrigation Development Authority, 
 
(vi) the Water Resources Research Institute, 
 
(vii) the Meteorological Service, 
 
(viii) the Environmental Protection Agency, 
 
(ix) the Forestry Commission, and 
(x) the Minerals Commission, 
(c) the Executive Secretary appointed under section 9 of this Act, 
(d) one chief, and 
(e) two other persons at least one of whom is a woman. 
(2) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the President in accordance with 
article 70 of the Constitution.
 
(e) 
 
if) 
 
(g) 
 
(h) 
 
(i) 
 
 
4. Tenure of office of members
 
 
 
(I) A member of the Board other than an ex officio member shall hold office for a
period of three years and is eligible for re-appointment. 
 
(2) A member of the Board may at any time by notice in writing to the 
President re 
sign from office. 
 
(3) A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without 
sufficient cause ceases to be a member.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) The President may in writing remove a member for stated reasons. 
 
 
 
VII - 4003
[Issue 1]


--- PAGE 4 ---

 
 
ACT 522 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
 
5. Filling of vacancies 
(1) When a member of the Board is incapacitated by illness or any other cause from 
performing the functions of office for more than twelve months, the President may acting 
in consultation with the appropriate institution appoint another person to perform the 
functions of the member until the member is able to resume the performance of the 
functions. 
(2) A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the remainder of the term 
of the previous member and is, subject to the provisions of this Act, eligible for re-
appointment. 
 
. 
(6) Questions proposed at meetings of the Board shall be determined by a majority of 
the votes of the members present and voting and where the votes are equal the chairman or 
the member presiding shall have a casting vote. 
 
(7) An act or a proceeding of the Board shall not be invalidated by a vacancy among 
its members or a defect in the appointment or qualification of a member. 
 
(8) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Board shall regulate the procedure 
for its meetings. 
6. Meetings of the Board 
 
(1) The Board shall ordinarily meet at least once every three months for the dispatch 
of business at the times and at the places as determined by the Chairman. 
         (2) The chairman may, at the request in writing of not less than one-third of the 
members of the Board, convene a special meeting of the Board. 
 
(3) The chairman shall preside at the meetings of the Board and in the absence of the 
chairman a member elected by the members present from among their number shall preside. 
  (4) The quorum at a meeting of the Board is seven members. 
   (5) The Board may co-opt a person to attend any of its meetings, but a co-opted person 
shall not vote at the meeting.
7. Commission to appoint committees 
The Board may for the performance of its functions appoint committees comprising 
members, or non-members or both and may assign to them the functions that are deter-
mined by the Board, but a committee composed entirely of non-members may only advise 
the Board. 
8. Allowances for members of the Board and committees 
 
Members of the Board and members of committees appointed by the Board shall be 
paid the allowances determined by the Minister responsible for Finance.
 
9. Executive Secretary to the Commission 
 
(I) The President acting in accordance with article 195 of the Constitution shall ap 
point an officer to be designated the Executive Secretary to the Commission. 
 
(2) The Executive Secretary is under the general supervision and direction of the 
Board, responsible for the day-to-day management and administration of the Commission.
VII - 4004
[Issue 1] 


--- PAGE 5 ---

 
ACT 522
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
(3) The Executive Secretary shall be the secretary to the Commission and shall in 
consultation with the chairman arrange the business and record and keep minutes of the 
meetings of the Board. 
(4) The Executive Secretary shall perform any other functions that the Board may 
assign. 
10. Other staff of the Commission 
(1) There shall be appointed by the President acting in accordance with article 195 of 
the Constitution, the officers that the Commission may require for the effective perform-
ance of its functions under this Act. 
(2) Other public officers may be transferred or seconded to the Commission or may 
otherwise give assistance to the Commission. 
11. Delegation of power of appointment 
The President may, subject to conditions determined by the President, delegate the 
power of appointment under sections 9 (1) and 10 (I) by directions in writing to the Board 
or to a member of the Board or to any other public officer.
 
 
Regulation of Use of Water Resources 
12. 
blic water vested in President 
Pu. 
 
The property in and control of all water resources is vested in the President on behalf 
of, and in trust for the people of the Republic. 
13. Prohibition of use of water without authority 
(1) Except in accordance with the provisions of this Act, a person shall not 
(a) divert, dam, store, abstract or use water resources, or 
(b) construct or maintain any works for the use of water resources. 
(2) Subsection (l) of this section shall not prevent the use of water resources for the 
purpose of fighting fires. 
14. Use of water resources for domestic purposes 
 
(1) A person who has lawful access to water resources may abstract and use the water 
for domestic purposes. 
(2) Subsection (1) does not authorise the construction of works for the purpose of ab-
stracting water resources. 
15. Enforcement notice 
(1) Where it appears to the Commission that the use of water resources for a purpose at 
a place poses a serious threat to the environment or to public health, the Commission may 
serve on the user of the water resources, an enforcement notice requiring the user to take 
the necessary steps to prevent or stop the activities. 
(2) An enforcement notice shall specify 
 
(a) the offending activity, 
 
 
 
 
 
[Issue 1] 
VII - 4005


--- PAGE 6 ---

 
 
Water Resources Commission Act. /996 
 
ACT 522 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
(c) 
the steps required to be taken, and 
the time within which the steps shall be taken. 
 
 
(3) The Commission may in an enforcement notice direct the immediate cessation of 
the offending activity where it considers that the circumstances so demand. 
(4) A person who acts contrary to an enforcement notice issued under this section 
commits an offence and is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of not less than fifteen 
penalty units and not more than two hundred and fifty penalty units and in default to a term 
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both the fine and the im-
prisonment; and in the case of a continuing offence to a further fine not exceeding five 
penalty units for each day that the offence continues after conviction. 
 16. Grant of water right 
(1) A person may apply to the Commission in writing for the grant of water right. 
(2) The Commission shall on receipt of an application make the necessary investiga-
tions including consultations with the inhabitants of the area of the water resources 
concerned. 
(3) The Commission shall publish in the Gazette notice of an application and the area 
in respect of which the application is made. 
(4) A person who claims that an interest of that person will be affected by the grant of a 
water right may notify the Commission within three months of the notice in the Gazette of 
the objection to the grant of the water right and shall specify the grounds of the objection. 
(5) The Board shall consider the objections made in respect of it and shall after con-
sultation with the persons and authorities that it may consider necessary, determine 
whether the water right shall be granted. 
 
(6) Where the Board is satisfied that the water right shall be granted, it shall so grant 
the right. 
 
(7) The Commission may grant the water right subject to the conditions specified in 
 the document for the grant. 
(8) A grant of water right is subject to ratification by Parliament. 
(9) Parliament may by resolution supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of 
all the members of Parliament exempt from the provisions of subsection (8) of this section 
the class of water right that it shall so resolve. 
17. Prohibition of transfer of water right 
A water right granted under this Act shall not be transferred without the written ap-
proval of the Commission. 
18. Creation of statutory wayleaves and easement 
Where the grant of a water right is to a statutory corporation or any other 
public body whose use of the water right ensures the benefit of the public, the provisions 
of the Lands (Statutory Wayleaves) Act, 1963 (Act 186) shall apply for the creation of a 
right of way or any other similar right for the purpose of enabling the works related to the 
water rights to be implemented.
 
 
VII - 4006
[Issue I] 


--- PAGE 7 ---

ACT 522
 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
 
19. Suspension or variation of water right 
 
 
(I) Where the water right has been granted and the Commission is of the opinion that 
the water resource in an area is insufficient or is likely to become insufficient as a result of 
the grant, it may by notice in writing to the holder of the water right in that area, suspend 
or vary the right to abstract or use the water resource in that area, for the period that the 
Commission considers necessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Where a notice has been issued under subsection (I) the water right shall cease for 
the period of the suspension or shall be exercisable only as so varied. 
 
 
20. Termination or limitation of right where water is required for public purpose 
(I) Subject to section 21, where the Commission is satisfied that water resources are 
required for a public purpose it may by notice in writing addressed to the holder of a water 
right, terminate or limit that right on the grounds that the water is required for public pur-
pose, and the right shall cease or shall be exercisable only as so limited. 
(2) A declaration in writing by the Commission that water resources are required for a 
public purpose is conclusive evidence of that fact. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21. Compensation on suspension or cancellation of water right 
. The holder of a water right is entitled to receive reasonable compensation in the circumstances in 
respect of the loss resulting from the termination or limitation of the right and in the absence of the 
agreement the Court shall determine the amount of the compensation. 
 
 
 
 
 
22. Water right to be terminated for breach of condition 
 
(1) Where the holder of the water right 
 
(a) fails to comply with a condition of the grant express or implied, or 
(b) has abstracted or used water resources for a purpose not authorised by the 
grant, 
the Commission may by notice in writing addressed to the holder require the holder to 
remedy the default within the period specified in the notice. 
(2) If the holder fails or neglects to remedy the default within the period specified the 
Commission may terminate the water right and inform the holder accordingly in writing.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. Termination or limitation for non-use
 
Where at any time the Commission has reason to believe that the holder of a water 
right has not, during the preceding two years, made full beneficial use of that right, it may 
after giving the holder of the right opportunity of making representations to the Commis-
sion, by notice in writing addressed to the holder and having regard to the investment in 
capital works and the long term national interest involved in the undertaking concerned 
 
 
 
 
terminate the right, or 
limit or modify the right as specified in the notice. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
VII - 4007
[Issue I]


--- PAGE 8 ---

 
ACT 522 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
 
24. Pollution of water 
 
A person who, except in accordance with the provisions of this Act or with the ap-
proval of the Environmental Protection Agency 
(a) interferes with or alters the flow of, or 
 
(b) pollutes or fouls, 
a water resource beyond the level that the Environmental Protection Agency may pre-
scribe, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a tine not exceeding five hundred 
penalty units or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years or to both the fine and 
the imprisonment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial and Miscellaneous Provisions
25. Funds of the Commission 
 
The funds of the Commission include
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
Government subvention, 
loans granted to the Commission, 
the moneys accruing to the Commission in the course of the performance 
of its functions under this Act or any other enactment, 
gifts, and 
moneys from any other source. 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
(e) 
 
26. Accounts and audit 
 
(1) The Commission shall keep books of account and proper records in relation to 
them in the form approved by the Auditor-General. 
(2) The books and accounts of the Commission shall be audited annually by the 
Auditor-General within three months of the end of the immediately preceding financial 
year. 
 
(3) The financial year of the Commission shall be the same as the financial year of 
the Government. 
27. Annual report 
(I) The Commission shall, as soon as possible after the expiration of each financial 
year but within six months after the termination of the year, submit to the Minister an 
annual report dealing generally with the activities and the operations of the Commission 
within that year which shall include 
(a) a copy of the audited accounts of the Commission together with the Auditor 
 
General's report on it, and 
 
(b) any other information that the Minister may require. 
(2) The Minister shall within two months after receiving the annual report of the 
Commission submit the report to Parliament with a statement the Minister considers 
necessary. 
 
 
 
VII - 4008
[Issue 1] 


--- PAGE 9 ---

 
ACT 522
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
 
 
28. Power to obtain information 
The Commission may for the proper and efficient performance of its functions request 
information from a person who shall, subject to any other law, comply with the request. 
29. Power to inspect works, etc. 
(I) The Commission may in consultation with the relevant District Assembly at a 
reasonable time enter on any land to inspect works constructed or under construction there 
and may ascertain or cause to be ascertained the amount of water abstracted or capable of 
being abstracted by means of the works. 
(2) A person shall not obstruct the Commission in the performance of its functions 
under subsection (1). 
(3) If in the opinion of the Board works have been constructed, maintained or used or 
are being so constructed as to constitute a danger to life, health, property or damage to the 
natural resources of the area, it may require a person for the time being enjoying the 
benefit of those works to demolish or to change the use of the works in the manner that the 
Commission considers necessary. 
(4) For the purpose of this section the Board may by notice in writing suspend a water 
right until it is satisfied that the requirements have been fulfilled. 
30. Power to require demolition of unlawful works 
      (1) The Commission may on the advice of a District Assembly by notice in writing 
require a person 
 
(a) who has constructed or extended, or caused to be constructed or extended 
 
any works contrary to any of the conditions under which the person was 
 
required or authorised to effect the construction or extension, or 
 
(b) whose water right in respect of which any works in existence have been 
 
terminated under the provisions of this Act or has otherwise come to an 
end, to modify, demolish or destroy the works within a period not being less 
than thirty days, specified in the notice. 
(2) Where a person fails to comply with a notice served on that person under subsec-
tion (I), the Commission may cause the works to be modified, demolished or destroyed and 
recover the cost of the modification, demolition or destruction from the person in default 
by civil suit. 
31. Minister to declare controlled area 
Where the Minister is satisfied that special measures are necessary for the protection of 
water resources in or derived from an area, the Minister may by executive instrument 
declare that area or a part of that area, to be a protected catchment area. 
32. Schemes for development of water resources in protected areas 
(I) Where an area is declared a protected catchment area the Commission may in con-
sultation with the National Development Planning Commission and the District Assembly 
of the protected catchment area, establish a comprehensive scheme for the development of 
the water resources of that area.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
VII - 4009
[Issue I]
  


--- PAGE 10 ---

 
ACT 522 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
 
 
(2) For the purpose of establishing a comprehensive scheme, the Commission may, 
after giving the holder an opportunity for making representations in respect of a subsisting 
right within the area, 
(a) declare the right terminated; 
(b) declare the right limited or modified in the respect specified by the Com 
mission; or
 
(c) grant the holder a new water right on the terms and conditions as it considers fit; 
but the holder is entitled to receive compensation in respect of the loss resulting from the 
termination or limitation of the right. 
(3) The Commission may cause to be constructed and maintained the works that the 
Board considers expedient for the better protection of land and water resources within a 
protected catchment area. 
(4) The Minister on the recommendations of the Commission and with the approval of 
Cabinet may levy prescribed charges on the beneficiaries of a comprehensive scheme 
within a protected catchment area in order to defray expenses of the construction or main-
tenance of the works or both.
33. Declaration of water emergency 
(I) Where the Minister, after consultation with the District Assembly of an area, is 
satisfied that because of drought or because of an accident or an unforeseen circumstances, 
a serious deficiency of water for essential domestic purposes exists or is threatened in an 
area the Minister may by notice in the Gazette declare that a water emergency exists in 
that area. 
(2) The Minister may after a declaration of water emergency, permit a person who has 
a supply of water in excess of the domestic purposes to supply water from the excess 
quantity of water to the area affected or to any other person, for the period specified. 
34. Penalty for offences 
 
A person who 
 
(a) diverts, dams, stores, abstracts or uses water resources contrary to section 13 (I) (a),
 
(b) 
constructs or maintains any works for the use of water resources contrary to 
section 13 (I) (b), 
(c) does not comply with a request made under section 29, 
(d) obstructs the Commission in the performance of its functions under sec 
tion 30 (I), or
 
 
 
 
  (e) does not comply with the directives given by the Minister under section 33 (2),
commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding seven hundred and 
fifty penalty units or a term of imprisonment of three years or to both the fine and the 
imprisonment. 
 
 
 
VII -4010
[Issue I] 


--- PAGE 11 ---

 
ACT 522
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
 
 
35. Regulations 
 
(1) The Commission may, by legislative instrument, make Regulations 
 
(a) for preserving existing uses of public water; 
(b) for controlling any change in the course, current or cross current of any 
contained surface water in order to obtain the most beneficial use of the 
water;
 
 
   
 
 
 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
relating to the declaration of water emergencies; 
for regulating the use of contained water and ground water; 
for the carrying out of investigations in respect of a function of the 
Commission; 
    (j) for the protection of watersheds; 
    (g) for the granting of permits to discharge waste into water bodies;                      
    (h) for prescribing the acceptable levels of pollution; 
    (i) to regulate or prohibit the doing of an act by a person in a protected catch-
ment area; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        (j) for the levying of charges under this Act; and 
        (k) generally for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) An instrument under subsection (1) of this section shall be signed personally by 
the chairman of the Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
36. Transitional provisions 
(1) Where a person claims an existing right of access to a water resource that person 
shall, within twelve months from the coming into force of this Act notify the Commission 
of that right. 
(2) The Commission shall on receipt of the notification conduct the investigation that 
the Board considers necessary and where it is satisfied that that right exists in relation to 
the person it may take the appropriate action.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37. Interpretation 
 
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 
 
"Auditor-General" includes an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General; 
 
"beneficial use" means the use of water including the method of diversion, 
storage, transportation and application of the water which is reasonable and consistent 
with the public interest, including domestic, energy, agricultural, commercial, industrial, 
municipal, navigational and recreational use; 
"Commission" means the Lake Resources Commission established by Parliament; 
"contained water" means underground streams, water upon the surface of the 
earth in bounds created naturally or artificially and the sub-flow of the water; 
 
"Court" means the High Court; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII - 4011
[Issue I]


--- PAGE 12 ---

 
ACT 522 
Water Resources Commission Act, 1996 
 
 
"existing right" means any right to water resources 
(a) which on the coming into force of this Act has been lawfully acquired, is 
possessed by and is being beneficially used by any person, or 
(b) lawfully acquired by any person before the coming into force of this Act 
for the purpose of supplying water to the public; 
"holder" means a person who has been granted a water right under this Act; 
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for Works and Housing; 
"prescribed" means prescribed by or under this Act or the Regulations; 
"protected catchment area" means any area declared by the Minister to be pre 
served for the protection of water resources in or derived from the area; 
"Regulations" means Regulations made under this Act; 
"water resources" means all water flowing over the surface of the ground or con 
tained in or flowing from any river, spring, stream or natural lake or part of a swamp or 
in or beneath a watercourse and all underground water but excluding any stagnant pan 
or swamp wholly contained within the boundaries of any private land; 
"works" includes any construction or activity for or related to use of water 
resources. 
 
 
38. Repeal 
 
Spent. 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. This section provides for the repeal of sections 8 and 9 of the Rivers Act, 1903; Cap. 226 of the 
1951 Edition of the Laws of the Gold Coast.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Issue I] 
VII - 4012
 
