Guinea
Water Code
Law No. L/94/005/CTRN of February 15, 1994
Chapter 1 - General Provisions
Art.1.- For the purposes of this Code, water resources are defined as all continental waters of the Republic of Guinea in all phases of the water cycle.
Their rational management is defined as the set of measures to be taken in order to ensure their permanent quantitative and qualitative inventory, protection, development, and optimal use, taking into account the social, economic, and cultural needs of the Nation.
Art.2.- The basic management unit for water resources is the river basin or the group of river basins, that is to say the geographical area in which all surface and groundwater is drained towards a common outlet.
In other cases, an adequate zone shall be demarcated by the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics in such a way that the water resources it contains can be managed according to the principles set forth in this Code.
An implementing Decree shall establish the physical demarcation of river basins and groups of river basins. An implementing Order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics shall specify, where necessary, the demarcation of the adequate zone or zones.
Art.3.- At the level of each river basin or group of river basins, a River Basin Committee may be created at the initiative of the National Directorate of Hydraulics, composed of representatives of the territorial administration and representatives of users. This body may be consulted on all matters covered by this Code. An order shall establish the modalities for the application of this article.
Chapter 2 - Legal Regime of Water
Art.4.- The water resources of the Republic of Guinea are an integral part of the Natural Public Domain of the State. As such, and subject to the provisions of this Code, they are not subject to appropriation. However, they may be subject to a right of use of a precarious and limited nature, subject to the regime of prior authorization.
Art.5.- These resources shall be subject to a quantitative and qualitative inventory according to the modalities defined by an implementing Order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Chapter 3 - Right of Use
Art.6.- Subject to the provisions of Article 4 of this law, every person has an inalienable right of access to water resources and a right to use them for domestic purposes.
Considered as being for domestic purposes is the use of water resources intended exclusively for satisfying the needs of natural persons within the limits of the quantities of water necessary for human consumption, hygiene, washing, and plant or animal production reserved for the family consumption of these persons.
The rights referred to in this article include the use of water extracted and contained in an individual or collective receptacle. However, the user is required to exercise their right in such a way as to preserve the availability of the resource in quantity and quality and not to harm other users.
Art.7.- All other uses are subject to obtaining a prior permit or concession.
Art.8.- Any natural or legal person under public or private law wishing to use water resources or modify a use already permitted or granted shall make a request to the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Art.9.- Uses of a seasonal nature or those which are quantitatively and qualitatively of little importance, according to the assessment of the competent Authority for the resource, require a simple authorization issued by the Minister in charge of Hydraulics or their representative.
Art.10.- For uses of the resource of a permanent nature, which are quantitatively and qualitatively significant or require works or developments with an amortization period not exceeding 10 years, the Minister in charge of Hydraulics shall issue a permit by order.
Art.11.- For uses of a permanent nature, such as the supply of drinking water to agglomerations, hydroelectric, agricultural or industrial developments and others, requiring investments with an amortization period greater than 10 years, a concession shall be granted by Decree.
Art.12.- The exemption and approval thresholds provided for in Articles 6 and 9 and the conditions for issuing the permit and the concession are respectively determined by order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics and by Decree. The rights of third parties are and remain expressly reserved in accordance with the legislation in force.
Art.13.- A regularly acquired right to use water, or a water right, may not be modified, suspended, revoked, or lost, except in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
When this right must be modified or revoked for reasons of public interest and in the absence of fault on the part of its holder, the latter is entitled to just and prior compensation.
Art.14.- The Minister in charge of Hydraulics is authorized at all times to modify a water right for reasons of public interest or a change in the purpose for which the right was granted.
In the event that such a modification causes appreciable damage to the holder, the latter is entitled either to an alternative source of water supply, or to just and prior compensation.
The holder of a water right may at any time request the modification of the conditions of its use by submitting a new reasoned request to the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Art.15.- The Minister in charge of Hydraulics is authorized to suspend by order the water rights in case of emergency and, at all times, when the imperatives of rational management of water resources so require.
The duration of such a suspension must, however, be in keeping with the conditions that caused it.
The user whose water right has been suspended is not entitled to any compensation for the lack of water suffered, except by means of a compensatory allocation, and to the extent that hydrological conditions permit.
Art.16.- The renewal of a permit or a concession must be the subject of a new request to the Minister in charge of Hydraulics. The corresponding deadlines are respectively three months in the case of a permit and six months in that of a concession.
Before the expiration of these deadlines, a response to the request for renewal of the water right must be made to the applicant.
The Minister in charge of Hydraulics is not required to renew water rights when the conditions on the basis of which they were initially granted are not satisfied or have ceased to exist. Such a decision does not give rise to any compensation. The applicant must be informed.
Art.17.- Water rights are freely transferable to the extent that their purpose and the conditions for which they were granted are not substantially modified.
Water rights may be leased or temporarily assigned, in which case the holder must register the name of the assignee with the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Upon the definitive transfer of a water right, the new user is required to register their title with the National Directorate of Hydraulics within thirty days, under penalty of a fine, revocation of their right, or the cumulative application of these two measures.
Art.18.- A water right may be revoked, subject to compensation, in the following cases:
1° when the public interest so requires,
2° when its use no longer meets the initial granting conditions or when it must be subject to another use or have another destination in order to ensure the rational management of the water resources on which it depends.
The revocation of a water right for the causes below does not give rise to any compensation:
1° when the holder makes improper use of, wastes, or pollutes the waters, or otherwise abuses their right;
2° when the holder has not complied with the request to re-establish the conditions governing its use, notified by the competent authority;
3° when the holder fails to provide the competent authority with the quantitative and qualitative data specified in the conditions of their title of use;
4° when the holder has not satisfied the conditions of their specifications.
Art.19.- The holder loses their water right in the following cases:
1° when they fail to exercise its use within three months following the date of issuance of the authorizations, six months for the permit, and twelve months for the concession, or do not effectively use the quantity of water specified in their title for two consecutive years;
2° when the destination of the use, or the corresponding source of supply has ceased to exist.
The loss of a water right in the cases mentioned above does not give rise to compensation.
Chapter 4 - Orders of Priority
Art.20.- Subject to the public interest, the use of water resources for the supply of drinking water enjoys absolute priority.
Except for the priority given to drinking water supply, no priority in principle is established between different uses.
The competent authority is however authorized to establish such priority by order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics whenever circumstances justify it.
Customary priorities in force within local communities remain in effect, provided that they are not in contradiction with the provisions of this Code.
Chapter 5 - Use of Water Resources
Art.21.- Any use of water resources must respect the orientations of the development plan of the river basin in which the resources used are included.
Art.22.- It is incumbent upon the various concerned administrative services, in agreement with the authority in charge of hydraulics, to enact all regulatory measures governing the uses falling within their competence, namely:
1° domestic and municipal uses, uses for agricultural purposes, navigation, floating, fishing, the use of hydraulic forces, industrial and mining uses, for sports, tourism and leisure, the protection of flora and fauna, as well as medicinal and thermal uses;
2° the prevention of improper use and waste of water resources, their recycling and reuse;
3° the protection of health, the control of pollution and the preservation of the environment.
Chapter 6 - Groundwater
Art.23.- Without prejudice to the provisions of the Mining Code, the Environment Code, the Forestry and Domain Code, and Chapter 3 of this Code, special measures shall govern the development, exploitation, and protection of groundwater sources and waters. Such measures shall provide for, in particular:
1° the establishment of protection perimeters around sources and captured water points for human consumption, which may include prescriptions relating to the use of soils, subsoil, and surface waters;
2° the demarcation of groundwater resource protection zones in which the modalities of protection and the conditions for exploitation of the groundwater table or tables may include prescriptions relating to the use of soils, subsoil, and surface waters;
3° the research permit, the exploitation permit, and the concession for the exploitation of groundwater;
4° the control of the digging of wells and their protection;
5° making the drilling of wells subject to the regime of prior authorization and operators to obtaining a drilling license;
6° the control of uses and the protection of water tables;
7° the enlargement and closure of wells as well as the installation of observation boreholes.
Art.24.- The modalities for establishing protection perimeters, demarcating water resource protection zones, and issuing drilling authorizations are determined by Order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Chapter 7 - Prevention of Harmful Effects of Water
Art.25.- The prevention of the harmful effects of water is regulated by order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics. It is also incumbent upon the various concerned administrative services, in agreement with the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics, to enact all regulatory measures falling within their competence and covering, in particular:
1° the establishment and management of flood and low-water forecasting and warning systems;
2° the construction of dikes and bank protection works as well as their maintenance, repair, and restoration;
3° the fight against soil erosion and deforestation;
4° the drainage and evacuation of wastewater;
5° the siltation of watercourses and the prevention of saltwater intrusions.
Art.26.- The installation of works in the major bed of a navigable watercourse, or in a flood-prone area, is subject to an authorization issued jointly by the Ministries respectively in charge of Hydraulics and Transport. The limits of the major bed of a watercourse are determined by Order of the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Art.27.- In order to protect dikes and bank protection works against the harmful actions of water, the following are prohibited:
1° the extraction of earth or other materials;
2° the storage of materials and the execution of construction;
3° the planting of trees on the dikes;
4° the passage of vehicles and animals if the dikes and works are not developed for this purpose.
Art.28.- The fight against floods is an obligation for any natural or legal person, any public or private community. It is carried out on the basis of a defense plan established by the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics, jointly with the interested administrative authorities.
Chapter 8 - Hydraulic Works and Developments
Art.29.- For the construction, exploitation, and maintenance of hydraulic works and installations, the various concerned administrative services, in agreement with the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics, shall enact all regulatory measures falling within their competence and covering, in particular:
1° the standards for construction, exploitation, and maintenance of hydraulic works and installations as well as inspection and safety procedures;
2° the construction and exploitation of common works;
3° the damages caused to third parties by hydraulic works and installations;
4° customary practices in force within the communities remain in effect, provided that they are not in contradiction with the provisions of this Code.
Chapter 9 - Protection of Water Quality
Art.30.- Without prejudice to the application of the Environment Code, a Decree shall establish:
1° the conditions for the discharge, flow, rejection, direct or indirect deposit of water or materials likely to alter the quality of surface and groundwater;
2° the conditions for controlling the physical, chemical, biological, and bacteriological characteristics of receiving waters and discharges.
Art.31.- The evacuation and discharge into waters, on the surface of the soil, or deep underground, of any material that may cause pollution are subject to the authorization of the Minister in charge of the Environment in consultation with the Minister in charge of Hydraulics.
Art.32.- The immersion or elimination by any process whatsoever of waste in continental waters is subject to a special authorization issued by the Minister in charge of the Environment in consultation with the Minister in Charge of Hydraulics.
Chapter 10 - Protection Zones and Protected Regions
Art.33.- The establishment and control of protection zones along watercourses and around hydraulic works and installations, other than those referred to in Article 24, are governed by the implementing Orders of this Code. It is incumbent upon the various concerned administrative services, in agreement with the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics, to enact all regulatory measures falling within their competence.
Art.34.- The various concerned administrative services, in agreement with the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics, shall enact all regulatory measures falling within their competence for the establishment and management of protected regions.
Chapter 11 - Planning and Administration
Art.35.- The administration of water resources aims to ensure the rational management of water resources in the Republic of Guinea.
The rational management of water resources is based on the following principles:
1° any use of water or any intervention by the administration on water is measured according to the water economy of the basin;
2° basin plans are integrated into a water resources development plan at the level of the natural region;
3° regional plans are integrated into a national water resources development plan;
4° the national water resources development plan is integrated into the economic development program;
5° water resources development programs and projects are executed under the supervision of the National Directorate of Hydraulics.
Art.36.- The administration of water resources is ensured by the following authorities:
1° the National Directorate of Hydraulics
2° its representatives at the level of the natural region and the prefecture
3° decentralized and local authorities.
Art.37.- A National Water Commission is established, which is composed of representatives of all ministerial technical services competent in the various sectors concerned with water problems. Its attributions are defined by Decree.
Art.38.- The National Water Commission shall adopt the draft national water policy; the Minister in charge of Hydraulics shall submit it for the approval of the Government within the framework of the adoption procedure for the national economic development plan.
Art.39.- The National Directorate of Hydraulics is responsible, among other things, for the coordination of actions aimed at the adoption of a national water policy, the administration of water rights, and the tasks necessary for the rational management of water resources that do not fall within the attributions of other ministerial technical services.
Art.40.- The representatives of the National Directorate of Hydraulics shall perform the same functions at the level of the four natural regions under the authority of the regional governors and prefects.
Art.41.- The management of water resources is ensured by the decentralized and local authorities within their territory. They shall apply customary law and practices, to the extent that they are not in contradiction with the provisions of this Code.
Decentralized authorities may organize themselves into user associations for the benefit of a single permit or concession.
Art.42.- The rational management of water resources of any basin or other area demarcated for this purpose may be entrusted to a public or private body by Decree.
The same procedure is followed in the case of inter-regional basins.
Art.43.- Major water resources development projects, particularly those with multiple purposes, may be entrusted to a public or private body institutionalized for this purpose by Decree or convention. Such a body then functions as a single user with respect to the granting authority, which issues it a single permit or concession governing the entire project.
Art.44.- The users of the same source of water supply or the beneficiaries of the same development are organized into a user association to which the competent authority issues a single authorization, permit, or concession.
Art.45.- The ministerial authorities, the national and deconcentrated technical services, the regional, prefectural, and local authorities, as well as the autonomous public and private bodies concerned with the management of water resources are required to provide all data and information in their possession to the National Directorate of Hydraulics.
Chapter 12 - Financing and Tariffs
Art.46.- The investment cost of developing water resources is borne by the natural and legal persons who undertake it.
In the case of joint development, each beneficiary participates in this cost, in proportion to the benefits they derive from it.
The beneficiaries of hydraulic works and developments carried out by the State participate in the construction cost in proportion to the benefits they derive from them.
Art.47.- The operation and maintenance costs of hydraulic works and developments carried out by or on behalf of natural or legal persons are borne by their beneficiaries, in proportion to the benefits they derive from them.
Art.48.- The service constituted by the provision of water by the Ministry in charge of Hydraulics for its use, its conservation in quantity, its protection in quality, the prevention of its harmful effects and its waste is remunerated by the beneficiaries in proportion to the benefits they derive from it.
Art.49.- The beneficiary of such a service is required to pay a water fee.
The users required to pay these water fees, as well as the rate, are defined by joint Order.
Chapter 13 - The Hydraulics Fund
Art.50.- A Hydraulics Fund is established, placed under the joint responsibility of the Ministers in charge of Hydraulics and Finance.
This Fund constitutes a special allocation account endowed with accounting and budgetary autonomy. Its budget is annexed to the State budget.
Art.51.- The Hydraulics Fund is not authorized to act as a project owner.
The permanent positions necessary for its operation are filled by State agents. These agents will only receive the remuneration corresponding to the corps to which they belong.
Art.52.- The Hydraulics Fund is financed by the following revenues:
the proceeds of taxes and fees collected by application of the provisions of the legislation on water and its implementing texts;
the proceeds of fines imposed by application of the legislation on water;
credits or grants allocated by the State or by international cooperation institutions;
all other revenues that may be legally attributed to the Fund.
Art.53.- The resources of the Hydraulics Fund are intended to promote the development of water resources and the implementation of the water policy.
The annual uses to which the Fund's revenues may be allocated are defined by Decree.
Art.54.- The rules relating to the composition, organization, and functioning of the organs of the Hydraulics Fund will also be established by Decree.
Chapter 14 - International Waters
Art.55.- In its relations with the States with which it shares water resources, the Republic of Guinea shall apply on its territory the principles and standards generally accepted by the international community regarding shared water, in particular the provisions of the conventions in force to which it has subscribed.
Chapter 15 - Miscellaneous Provisions
Art.56.- An inventory of all current uses and the corresponding clearing of water rights shall be carried out until a complete register of uses and authorizations, permits, and corresponding concessions is established.
Art.57.- The conflicts to which the application of this Code may give rise between, on the one hand, the State, and on the other hand, the concessionary companies and the territorial communities, are judged by the Guinean Courts and Tribunals or by way of international arbitration as the case may be.
Art.58.- The officials of the water resources administration and their sworn representatives appointed for this purpose are authorized to enforce the provisions of this Code, to install prohibition signs and panels, to ensure their protection and, where appropriate, to draw up reports of findings.
Infractions of this Code or of the texts taken for its application committed by third parties or by clients of the public service may be noted by judicial police officers, engineers and agents of the National Directorate of Hydraulics and its deconcentrated services and those of the National Directorate of Forests and Hunting, agents of companies approved by the State and duly sworn. The conditions for the exercise of the functions of sworn agents will be established by regulation.
Art.59.- Any aggression, any resistance exercised with violence or assault against the persons designated in the preceding article, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions, will be punished in accordance with the provisions of Articles 178 and following of the Penal Code.
Art.60.- The penalties provided for in Articles 178 and following of the Penal Code will also be pronounced against any natural or legal person who will have voluntarily used an installation in the absence of a permit or concession in accordance with Articles 10 and 11 of this Code or will not have respected the conditions prescribed by the said permits or concessions.
Anyone who has infringed the prohibition on discharge or has not respected the prescription of Article 30 of this Code will be punished with the same penalties as above.
Chapter 16 - Final Provisions
Art.61.- The provisions of Law 036/APN/81 of 9/11/81 regulating the exploitation of water resources in the Republic of Guinea are an integral part of this Water Code.
The provisions of the Codes promulgated by the Ordinances below: No. 076/PRG/SGG/86 of 21/3/86 on the Mining Code; No. 045/PRG/SGG/87 of 28/5/1987 on the Environment Code of the Republic of Guinea; No. 081/PRG/SGG/89 of 20/12/89 on the Forestry Code; No. 0/92/019 of 30 March 1992 on the Land and Domain Code, applicable to the management of water resources, remain in force to the extent that they do not contravene the provisions of this Code.
Art.62.- This Code shall be registered and published in the Official Journal of the Republic of Guinea and executed as a law of the State.