

--- PAGE 1 ---

LAWS OF GRENADA
REVISED EDITION
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE
AUTHORITY ACT
CHAPTER 208
Act No.
25 of 1990
Amended by
Act No. 41 of 1991
Act No. 52 of 1991
Act No. 30 of 1992
Act No. 15 of 1995
Act No. 35 of 1996
Act No. 23 of 2008
Printed and published with the authority of the
Government of Grenada
1 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 2 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
CHAPTER 208
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY ACT
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PARTI
Preliminary
SECTION
1. Short title.
2. Interpretation.
PART II
i Dy Sy
8A.
10.
National Policy and Establishment of the National Water and Sewerage Authority
National policy for water and sewerage.
Establishment of the National Water and Sewerage Authority.
Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Water Commission to the Authority.
Duties and powers of the Authority.
The Authority to provide a satisfactory supply of water.
PART II
The Board and Staff of the Authority
Composition of Board of Directors.
Exemption from liability.
Board shall appoint staff.
Secondment of public officers and preservation of pensions.
PART IV
Power of Entry on and Acquisition of Land, etc.
Control of water.
Right to use water vested in the Authority.
Right to use water may not be otherwise acquired.
Land acquisition.
Power to enter upon property.
Power to enter land.
Power to construct works on land.
Compensation for land after construction of works.
Liability of Authority for damage to public works.
Power to assess and impose charge upon person who benefits from construction of works.
Protected areas.
Offence of obstruction.
Sewerage and sewage disposal.
4) [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 3 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
PART V
Financial Provisions
SECTION
24. Funds of the Authority and exemption from duties and taxes.
25. Estimates to be prepared and submitted.
26. Financial year of the Authority.
26A. Board obligated to implement business plan.
26B. Accounts.
26C. Audit by Director of Audit and report to the House of Representatives.
PART VI
Rates, Charges and Fees
27. Water supply and sewerage areas.
27A. Levying and collection ofrates, charges and fees.
28. Rates, charges and fees.
29. Separate or combined rates, etc., chargeable.
30. General provisions regarding rates, charges and fees.
31. Fire service.
32. Unauthorised use of Authority’s works forbidden.
33. Recovery of debts and cutting off supplies.
34. Standpipes and public taps.
35. Provisions as to the liability for rates and charges of owners and occupiers of premises.
PART VII
Catchment Areas
36. Defining limits of catchment areas and reservation of same.
37. No building to be erected on catchment area.
38. Catchment areas to be retained as forest reserves.
39. Catchment areas to be reserved for augmenting water supply.
40. Power of Authority to carry out works, etc., which concern a public body.
PART VIII
Miscellaneous
41. Acquisition of property by agreement, and power to enter for survey, etc., purposes.
42. Compulsory acquisition of way-leave.
43. Power of entry of persons specially authorised by the Authority.
44. Sinking of wells and boreholes, and provisions for issue of licences and permits.
45. Permits and licences to be personal to grantee unless endorsed.
46. Penalty for offences against section 44.
47. Power of Authority to cause wells and boreholes to be made safe.
48. Power of Authority in cases of contravention of section 44.
49. Exception as to shallow-dug wells, etc.
50. Minister may give directions.
[Issue 1/2011] 4


--- PAGE 4 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
SECTION
51. Financial assistance for families earning low income.
52. Regulations.
53. Penalty if water or sewerage connection made without permission.
54. Offences in protected area.
55. Offences at public standpipe.
56. General penalty.
57. Act binds the Government.
SCHEDULE
Procedure of the Board and Related Matters
CHAPTER 208
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY ACT
An Act to establish the National Water and Sewerage Authority as a corporate body;
to make provision for the functions, powers and administration of the Authority,
for the transfer to the Authority of the assets and liabilities of the Central Water
Commission, and to provide for connected matters.
[Act No. 25 of 1990 amended by Act No. 41 of 1991, Act No. 52 of 1991, Act No. 30 of 1992,
Act No. 15 of 1995, Act No. 35 of 1996, Act No.23 of2008.]
[14th January, 1991.]
PARTI
Preliminary
Short title
1. This Act may be cited as the National Water and Sewerage Authority Act.
Interpretation
2. In this Act—
“appointed day” means the 14th January, 1991;
“Authority” means the National Water and Sewerage Authority established by
section 4;
“body of water” means ground water and water contained or flowing in a spring,
steam, river, natural lake or swamp, or in or beneath a watercourse or in a zone below
the water table where the interstices are filled with ground water, and includes water
5 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 5 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
diverted or abstracted from any of the foregoing, or stored therein, by means of
works, but does not include the water in a spring which is situated wholly within the
boundaries of land owned by any one landowner and which does not naturally dis-
charge into a water-course extending beyond the boundaries of such land or abutting
on the boundaries of such land;
“business plan”, for a financial year, means—
(a) _ the business plan approved under section 26; and
(6) all amendments to the business plan approved under that section,
for the financial year;
“catchment area” means any surface of land or any device which collects rainfall
or through which water flows for the purposes of waterworks;
“chairperson” means the chairperson of the Board of the Authority appointed
under section 8 and includes any deputy chairperson and any person acting on behalf
of the chairperson;
“financial year” means the financial year referred to in section 26;
“Manager” means the Manager of the Authority appointed by the Board under
section 9(1) and includes any other person for the time being lawfully discharging the
functions of the Manager under this Act;
“meter” means an appliance used to measure, ascertain or regulate the quantity of
water taken or used from waterworks and includes an appliance used for estimating
the flow of water in or from any part of waterworks;
“Minister” means the Minister for the time being responsible for water supply and
sewerage;
“owner” means the holder of a tenement direct from the Crown whether under
lease, licence or otherwise, or the immediate landlord of a tenement, or the agent of
any such holder, or landlord, who is absent or under disability, or if there be no such
agent the occupier of the tenement;
“sewage” means matter conveyed in a sewer;
“sewer” includes any drain pipe, conduit or channel for the conveyance of sewage;
“sewerage” means drainage by means of a sewer or series of sewers;
“shallow-dug well” means a well the maximum depth of which does not exceed
five feet;
“standpipe” means any fountain, standpipe, valve, tap or appliance, used or
intended to be used for or in connection with the supply of water to the public from
waterworks, installed by and belonging to or vested in the Authority;
“water-course” means lake, pond, spring, river, stream, reservoir, aqueduct or pipe
from, through, to, along or by which water is conducted and supplied to or from
waterworks;
[Issue 1/2011] 6


--- PAGE 6 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
“waterworks” means reservoirs, wells, dams, tanks, cisterns, tunnels, filter beds,
conduits, aqueducts, pipes, fountains, showers, valves, pumps, engines, culverts and
all machinery, lands, buildings and things used for supplying water;
“way-leave” means a right of the Authority to the use of land for the laying of
tunnels, conduits, aqueducts, channels, drains, outfalls for sewers, sewers, water
mains, pipes or other works, structures and appliances and accessories thereto,
together with the right of access to such land and the right of opening up such land
from time to time for the inspection, renewal, repair, replacement or removal of any
such works, and the right of restoring any such land, without in any such case affect-
ing the ownership of such land.
PART II
National Policy and Establishment of the National
Water and Sewerage Authority
National policy for water and sewerage
3. The Government shall promote a national policy for water and sewerage in Gre-
nada, and shall so discharge its functions in respect of the following matters as to secure
the effective execution of that policy by the bodies responsible therefor, namely—
(a) the provision of water supplies and the conservation, augmentation, distri-
bution and proper use of water resources including the preservation and
protection of catchment areas;
(b) sewerage and the treatment and disposal of sewage and other effluents.
Establishment of the National Water and Sewerage Authority
4. (1) For the purpose of exercising the functions and powers conferred on it by vir-
tue of this Act, there is hereby established a body corporate
to be known as the National
Water and Sewerage Authority.
(2) The Authority shall have perpetual succession and a Common Seal with power to
make contracts and to sue and be sued in its corporate name, to acquire, hold and dispose
of all kinds of property, and to draw, accept, make, endorse and negotiate bills of
exchange, promissory notes, bills of lading and other negotiable instruments.
Transfer of assets and liabilities of Central Water Commission to the Authority
5. (1) All the waterworks vested in the Central Water Commission established by
section 4 of the Water Supply Act, No. 23 of 1969, are transferred to and vested in the
Authority, and all assets, powers, duties, liabilities and obligations of the Central Water
Commission are also transferred to the Authority.
(2) Debts and liabilities transferred by subsection (1) shall be debts and liabilities of
the Authority and shall, in the manner provided by this Act, be defrayed out of the water
rates, rents and funds out of which they would have been defrayed if such waterworks
had remained vested in the Central Water Commission.
af [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 7 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(3) Agreements to which the Central Water Commission was a party immediately
before the appointed day shall have effect as if—
(a) the Authority had been a party thereto;
(b) for references to the Central Water Commission there were substituted, in
respect of anything falling to be done on or after the appointed day, a refer-
ence to the Authority;
(c) for references to any member or officer of the Central Water Commission
there were substituted, in respect of anything falling to be done on or after
the appointed day, a reference in each case to such person as the Authority
may appoint or, in default of such appointment, to the member or officer of
the Authority who corresponds as nearly as may be to the member or offi-
cer of the Central Water Commission;
(d) for references to any fund or revenues of the Central Water Commission
there were substituted, in respect of anything falling to be done on or after
the appointed day, a reference to the corresponding fund or revenues of the
Authority.
Duties and powers of the Authority
6. (1) The Authority shall have full power and authority over all the surface and
underground waters of Grenada, and shall collate and publish information from which
assessments can be made of the actual and prospective demand for water and of actual
and prospective water resources. :
(2) The Authority shall take such action as may be necessary or expedient for the
purpose of—
(a) conserving, augmenting, distributing or redistributing water resources in
Grenada;
(b) maintaining and improving sewerage systems in Grenada.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (2), the Authority shall—
(a) investigate the water resources of Grenada and advise and make recom-
mendations to the Minister in connection with improvements, preservation,
conservation, utilisation and the apportionment of those resources, and as
to the provision of additional water supplies;
(b) carry out surveys of consumption and demand for water supplies and of the
water resources of Grenada;
(c) prepare estimates of the future water supply and sewage disposal require-
ments of any district or area;
(@) formulate proposals for meeting the existing and future water supply or
sewage disposal requirements of any district or area;
(e) carry out surveys of the demand for sewerage facilities;
(3) investigate and make recommendations to the Minister relating to the
improvement, preservation, operation and utilisation of sewerage facilities,
and the provision of additional sewerage facilities;
[Issue 1/2011] 8


--- PAGE 8 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(g) furnish to the Minister such information relating to water resources or
water supplies or sewerage facilities as is available;
(A) with the prior written approval of the Minister, from time to time, fix, levy
and collect fees, rates and charges for water supplied and the use of the
sewerage system, and for all other services performed and facilities pro-
vided by the Authority; and may
(0) with the concurrence of and subject to such limitations as may be imposed
by the Ministry of Finance, borrow money or obtain credit in Grenada or in
any other country;
(/) create, make, draw, accept, endorse, execute, issue, discount, buy, sell,
negotiate and deal in bills, notes, warrants, coupons, stock, debentures and
other negotiable or transferable instruments.
The Authority to provide a satisfactory supply of water
7. (1) The Authority shall, unless prevented by drought, reduced rainfall or any
extraordinary event or unavoidable incident or act of God, provide to the public a satis-
factory supply of potable water for domestic purposes and a potable or otherwise satisfac-
tory supply of water for agricultural, industrial and commercial purposes and for such
other purposes as may be prescribed by the Minister.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the Authority may examine surface or under-
ground water in any public or private place in Grenada to determine whether water pollu-
tion exists and, if so, the causes thereof.
(3) In subsection (1), the expression “supply of potable water for domestic purposes”
does not include the supply of potable water—
(a) for animals (other than kept for domestic purposes) or for washing motor
vehicles by the operation of a hose;
(b) for any profession, trade or business, or for use in fountains or swimming
pools.
(4) In subsection (1), the duty to supply water for agricultural purposes does not
include any duty to supply water for the purpose of watering a household garden.
(5) In subsection (1), the expression “industrial or commercial purposes” means water
for use in connection with any professional, trade, business, industrial, or commercial
enterprise.
PART Ill
The Board and Staff of the Authority
Composition of Board of Directors
8. (1) There shall be a Board of Directors (hereinafter called “the Board”) which
shall be responsible for the due performance of the duties imposed and exercise of the
powers conferred on the Authority by this Act and for carrying out the policy and general
administration of the Authority.
9 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 9 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members—
(a) achairperson, and a deputy chairperson, appointed by the Minister;
(6) four persons of whom one shall be nominated by each of the following
Ministers—
(i) the Minister of Agriculture,
(ii) the Minister of Health,
(iii) the Minister of Works,
(iv) the Minister of Finance;
(c) one person nominated by the Private Sector Organisation of Grenada and
appointed by the Minister; and
(d) two persons appointed by the Minister to represent the general public.
(3) A member of the Board shall be entitled to receive such allowances, if any, as
may be recommended by the Board and approved by the Minister, and to be paid such
travelling and other expenses as he or she may necessarily and reasonably incur in the
performance of his or her duties as such member.
(4) The Common Seal of the Authority shall be affixed by the chairperson, or in his
or her absence the deputy chairperson, and by the Manager, and a document so sealed
shall be authenticated by the signatures of the chairperson or deputy chairperson and the
Manager and shall, if it purports to have been so authenticated, be officially and judicially
noticed.
(5) The Schedule shall have effect with respect to the procedure of the Board and
related matters.
Exemption from liability
8A. No action, suit prosecution or other legal proceedings shall be brought or insti-
tuted against a director personally in respect of an act done in good faith in the perform-
ance or intended performance of his or her duties under this Act.
Board shall appoint staff
9. (1) The Board, with the approval of the Minister signified in writing, shall
appoint—
(a) a Manager of the Authority;
(b) adeputy Manager.
(2) The Board shall appoint such number of staff as it deems necessary or desirable
for the efficient carrying out of the duties, and for the proper conduct and operation, of
the Authority.
(3) The Board may, subject to any conditions it may specify, discipline, suspend,
dismiss, remove and revoke the appointment of staff.
[Issue 1/2011] 10


--- PAGE 10 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(4) The Board may, subject to any conditions it may specify, delegate to the Manager
the authority to employ, suspend or dismiss staff.
(5) Staff shall be entitled to receive such remuneration earned by reason of employ-
ment with the Authority, and such allowances, if any, as the Board shall determine.
(6) The Board may engage the services of any professionally or otherwise suitably
qualified person as it deems necessary or expedient to employ for the purpose of assisting
the Board in the performance of any duty or the exercise of any power of the Authority
under this Act.
Secondment of public officers and preservation of pensions
10. (1) The Board may request the Public Service Commission to authorise the sec-
ondment of public officers to the Authority.
(2) A secondment in pursuance of subsection (1) shall be treated as a secondment to
which Part III of the Schedule to the Pensions Act, Chapter 233, applies and service with
the Authority shall be deemed to be pensionable office within the meaning of that Act.
(3) The Authority shall, in respect of a public officer seconded under subsection (1),
contribute to the Consolidated Fund such amount by way of pensionable emoluments and
personal allowances for the purposes of the Pensions Act, Chapter 233, as the Minister
may at any time determine.
PART IV
Power of Entry on and Acquisition of Land, etc.
Control of water
11. The control of every body of water shall be exercised by the Authority in a manner
designed to achieve the purposes of this Act.
Right to use water vested in the Authority
12. The right to the use of every body of water is vested in the Authority and no person
shall divert, abstract, obstruct or use water from a body of water otherwise than under or
_ by virtue of the provisions of this Act.
Right to use water may not be otherwise acquired
13. Subject to section 12, no conveyance, lease or other instrument executed after the
appointed day shall be effectual to convey, assure, demise, transfer or vest in any person
other than the Authority any property or right or interest or privilege in respect of any
body of water.
Land acquisition
14. (1) The Authority may, if the Board is satisfied that it is in the public interest to
do so, purchase by private treaty land or other property for any purpose connected with
the discharge of its duties; in particular, land or other property may be purchased for the
protection, conservation, treatment, improvement, installation or use of water and sewer-
age facilities.
11 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 11 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(2) At the request of the Board the Minister may promote legislation for the compul-
sory acquisition by the Authority of private property reasonably required for the purposes
of waterworks and sewerage works, and any acquisition of property under this provision
shall be deemed to be an acquisition for public purposes.
(3) In subsection (1), the expression “land” includes easements and other rights over
land.
(4) The right to acquire private property under subsection (2) shall include a right on
the part of the Authority to acquire, subject to the provisions of section 42, any necessary
way-leave.
(5) For the purposes of the acquisition of a way-leave under this section, legislation
providing for the compulsory acquisition of private property shall have effect and shall be
construed as if reference contained therein to land includes, where the context so
requires, reference to any necessary way-leave under this Act.
(6) Where the Authority acquires a way-leave over land neither the owner nor the
occupier nor any other person shall construct anything whatsoever whether temporary or
permanent over or across works built or maintained by the Authority in the lawful exer-
cise of its rights over the land without the written consent of the Authority.
Power to enter upon property
15. A person duly authorised by the Board may enter upon property to take measures
for the purposes of protecting, conserving or regulating water, or preserving water from
pollution or preventing the diversion, wastage, pollution, or illicit use, of water.
Power to enter land
16. (1) A person duly authorised by the Board may, at any reasonable time—
(a) enter land for the purpose of performing any duty under this Act whether in
relation to that land or not;
(b) — enter land to inspect or survey it and inspect any articles thereon for the
purpose of determining whether, and if so in what manner, any duty of the
Authority is to be performed in relation to the land, or whether any statu-
tory provision relating to such duty is being or has been complied with.
(2) A person duly authorised under subsection (1) may be accompanied by such
number of other persons, and may take with him or her such equipment, as is necessary.
(3) No person authorised to enter land for the purposes specified in subsection (1)
shall enter without first giving to the owner or occupier or the responsible person manag-
ing or in charge of the land reasonable notice, whether written or verbal, of his or her
intended visit and the purpose thereof:
Provided that such person may enter without giving notice if he or she—
(a) has reasonable cause to believe that some provision of this Act or subsidi-
ary legislation made thereunder has been or is being or is about to be con-
travened;
[Issue 1/2011] 12


--- PAGE 12 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(b) is unable to give notice within a reasonable time having regard to all the
circumstances; or
(c) _ has reasonable grounds for not giving notice,
and provided further that persons entering, whether notice has been given or not, shall
cause as little damage as possible and then only where the causing of damage is unavoid-
able for the purpose of exercising the power under subsection (1).
(4) Compensation shall be paid by the Authority to the owner of land or property to
which actual injury is caused by measures taken under the powers conferred by this sec-
tion or section 15 other than measures for the prevention of wastage, the stopping or
removal of an unauthorised diversion, abstraction or obstruction, the prevention of pollu-
tion of water or preventing an illicit connection or damage to the sewerage system. If the
parties are not able to agree the amount of compensation, the amount shall be determined
by arbitration in accordance with the Arbitration Act, Chapter 19.
(5) A person who prevents, hinders or obstructs a duly authorised person from enter-
ing land or upon any property or from lawfully carrying out his or her powers under this
section or section 15 shall be guilty of an offence and liable, on summary conviction, to a
fine of two thousand dollars or, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months.
Power to construct works on land
17. The Authority, after reasonable notice has been given to the landholder con-
cerned, if it appears to the Board to be necessary to protect water resources or sewerage,
may construct and maintain upon the land such works as it considers necessary or desir-
able for—
(a) the protection of the source or course of any body of water;
(b) the disposal or control of flood water;
(c) _ the conservation and storage of water;
(d) the distribution, apportionment or measurement of water; or
(e) the collection, treatment and disposal of sewerage.
Compensation for land after construction of works
18. The Authority shall pay compensation to the owner of land on which works are
constructed under section 17. In assessing the amount of such compensation the Board
shall take into consideration any benefit or betterment which has accrued to the land by
the construction of the works and any adverse effect on such land caused by those works.
Liability of Authority for damage to public works
19. The Authority shall be liable for and shall make good all damage to any public
works which may be occasioned by reason of the works of the Authority being defective
in construction, or out of repair or of insufficient capacity and, if the public works are not
made good after notice to do so has been served on the Authority by the Minister for the
time being responsible for public works, he or she shall cause such damage to be made
good and the cost of so doing shall be deducted from any rates or other monies owing or
payable to the Authority by the Government.
13 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 13 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
Power to assess and impose charge upon person who benefits from construction of
works
20. (1) Where works are constructed under section 17 any person who, in the opin-
ion of the Board, has benefited by the construction of such works shall, if so decided by
resolution of the Board, pay to the Authority a charge for such benefit and the amount of
the charge shall be assessed by the Board.
(2) If a person aggrieved by a decision or assessment made under the provisions of this
section lodges with the Board an objection, the matter shall be determined by arbitration.
Protected areas
21. Where the Minister, after consultation with or on the advice of the Authority, is
satisfied that special measures are necessary for the protection of the public water
resources in or derived from specified areas, he or she may by notice in the Gazette spec-
ify and declare such area or any part thereof to be a protected area and may, by the same
notice, require, regulate or prohibit the doing by any person in such specified area, or part
thereof, of any act to the extent which he or she considers necessary for the protection of
such area or for the protection of the water supplies obtained therefrom, and any person
who knowingly contravenes the provisions of any such notice commits an offence against
this section and is liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of five thousand dollars and to
imprisonment for twelve months.
Offence of obstruction
22. A person who hinders or obstructs an employee or agent of the Authority in the
performance of his or her functions under this Act is guilty of an offence and liable, on
summary conviction, to a fine of one thousand dollars and to imprisonment for three
months.
Sewerage and sewage disposal
23. (1) The Authority is empowered, in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the regulations, to provide such public sewers as may be necessary and to make such
provision, by means of sewage disposal works, marine treatment or otherwise, as may be
necessary for effectively dealing with sewage.
(2) In discharging its functions under this section the Authority shall comply with the
Public Health Act, Chapter 263, and the Public Health Regulations.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the
Authority may—
(a) prepare schemes for sewerage and sewage disposal services and construct,
maintain and operate such schemes;
(6) design, construct, acquire, operate and maintain works for receiving, treat-
ing and disposing of sewage;
(c) control and regulate the disposal of sewage by means of treatment plants
that are not part of any sewerage system of the Authority; and
[Issue 1/2011] 14


--- PAGE 14 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(d) disseminate information and advice with respect to the installation, mainte-
nance and management of such sewage treatment plants as are mentioned
in paragraph (c).
(4) On the appointed day the sewerage authority constituted under the St. George’s
Sewerage Act, Chapter No. 269 of 1958, is dissolved.
(5) The Authority may adopt or take over the operation of any such sewage treatment
plants as are mentioned in subsection (3)(c) on such terms as may be agreed between the
Board and the owner thereof.
(6) The Authority shall as soon as reasonably practicable make regulations governing
the making of connections to public sewers, prohibiting or controlling the discharge of
certain effluents to public sewers and prohibiting unauthorised connections to such sewers.
PART V
Financial Provisions
Funds of the Authority and exemption from duties and taxes
24. (1) The funds of the Authority shall include—
(a) such sums of money as may be granted to the Authority by Parliament or
any agency;
(6) all amounts which, on the appointed day are at the disposal of or belong to
the Central Water Commission established by section 4 of the Water Sup-
ply Act, No. 23 of 1969;
(c) sums accruing to the Authority by virtue of the performance of its duties
under section 6(3)(/);
(ad) any monies borrowed under the authority of section 6(3)(i);
(e) such monies as the Ministry of Finance may, from time to time, approve as
funds of the Authority.
(2) All monies of the Authority, including monies raised on loan or grants received
for the purposes of this Act, shall be paid into an account in the name of the Authority in
accordance with directions of the Board.
(3) All monies received by the Accountant-General for the Authority shall be paid
into a fund to be called the National Water and Sewerage Authority Fund and shall be at
the disposal of the Authority on demand.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other written law, the Authority is
exempted from payment of import duty, stamp duty, income tax, real property tax, and
any levy, and any other duty or tax whatsoever.
Estimates to be prepared and submitted
25. The Board shall, within three months after the 30th of June in each year, cause to
be prepared and submitted to the Minister a written estimate for the ensuing year contain-
ing details—
(a) _ of the anticipated revenue of the Authority from all sources which shall be
separately specified therein;
15 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 15 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(6) of the anticipated expenditure of the Authority which shall be specified in
respect of each of the separate activities of the Authority.
Financial year of the Authority
26. (1) The financial year of the Authority is the twelve month period beginning on
the 1st day of January and ending on the 31st day of December.
(2) The Board shall, not later than four months before the commencement of each
financial year and in such form as the Minister requires, prepare in respect of the finan-
cial year, and submit to the Minister, a proposal for a business plan for the financial year
that must contain—
(a) a statement of the Authority’s objectives and priorities in carrying out its
responsibilities for the financial year and the following two financial years;
(5) —acomprehensive business plan that—
(i) shows how resources, including but not limited to financial resources,
will be allocated to meeting the objectives and priorities of the
Authority for the financial year, and
(ii) includes pro forma financial statements as required by the Minister;
(c) a comparison of the pro forma financial statements with the actual financial
statements for the previous financial year;
(d) a statement as to how the Authority proposes to measure its performance in
carrying out its responsibilities in the financial year; and
(e) any other information required by the Minister by written notice to the
Board.
(3) The Minister shall, on request of the Board, extend the time for submitting a pro-
posal for a business plan.
(4) The Minister shall, as soon as practicable, consider the proposal for a business
plan and may—
(a) approve the proposal as submitted;
(b) with the approval of the Board, amend the proposal and approve it as
amended; or
(c) refer the proposal back to the Board with directions that the Board take any
further action with respect to it that the Minister considers appropriate.
(5) Where the Minister refers the proposal for a business plan back to the Board
under subsection (4), he or she shall provide the Board with his or her reasons for not
approving it.
(6) A proposal for a business plan that is referred back to the Board under subsec-
tion (4)(c) shall be resubmitted to the Minister as directed by the Minister and, when it is
resubmitted, subsections (4) and (5) apply.
(7) When a proposal in relation to a financial year is approved by the Minister, it
becomes the business plan for that financial year.
[Issue 1/2011] 16


--- PAGE 16 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(8) The Board—
(a) may, of its own motion, submit to the Minister a proposal to amend an
approved business plan; and
(6) shall, on request of the Minister and within the time required by the Minister,
submit to the Minister a proposal to amend an approved business plan.
(9) Subsections (4), (5), (6) and (7) apply to a proposal submitted to the Minister
under subsection (8).
Board obligated to implement business plan
26A. The Board—
(a) _ shall in each financial year implement the business plan for that financial
year; and
(b) establish a mechanism for monitoring the implementation of the business
plan.
Accounts
26B. (1) The Board shall—
(a) _ keep proper books of account of its income and other receipts and expendi-
tures; and
(d) ensure that—
(i) all money received is promptly and properly brought to account,
(ii) all payments out of its money are correctly made and properly
authorised, and
(iii) adequate control is maintained over its property and over the incur-
ring of liabilities by the Authority.
(2) The books of account kept under subsection (1) shall—
(a) be sufficient to record and explain the Authority’s transactions;
(b) enable the Authority’s financial position to be determined with reasonable
accuracy at any time; and
(c) _ be sufficient to enable financial statements to be prepared and audited in
accordance with this section.
(3) Within three months after the end of each financial year, the Authority shall cause
to be prepared—
(a) the following financial statements together with proper and adequate
explanatory notes—
(i) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the Authority at the end of
the financial year,
(ii) a statement of the revenue and expenditure of the Authority during
the financial year,
17 [Issue 1/2011]


--- PAGE 17 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(iii) such other financial statements for the financial year as may be
specified in writing by the Minister; and
(b) an annual report of the Authority on the implementation of the business
plan and such other matters as the Board considers advisable or the Minister
directs.
(4) Without delay, after the completion of the financial statements and the annual
report, the Board shall furnish a copy of each to the Director of Audit.
Audit by Director of Audit and report to the House of Representatives
26C. (1) Not later than three months after receipt of the financial statements and
annual report from the Board, the Director of Audit shall audit the financial statements in
accordance with the Audit Act, Chapter 22A.
(2) Without delay, after the completion of his or her audit of the Authority, the Direc-
tor of Audit shall submit a copy of his or her report together with the financial statements
and annual report to the Minister and the Board.
(3) The Minister shall, not later than seven days after the House of Representatives
first meets after he or she has received the report together with the financial statements
and annual report of the Authority, lay it before the House of Representatives.
(4) If the Minister of Finance fails to lay the report together with the financial state-
ments and the annual report of the Authority before the House of Representatives in
accordance with subsection (3), the Director of Audit shall transmit the report, the finan-
cial statements and the annual report to the Speaker who shall, as soon as practicable,
present them to the House of Representatives.
(5) As soon as reasonably practicable after the report together with the financial
statements and the annual report of the Authority have been laid before the House of
Representatives, the Board shall cause the report, the financial statements and the annual
report of the Authority to be published in the Gazette.
PART VI
Rates, Charges and Fees
Water supply and sewerage areas
27. (1) For the purposes of the performance of its duties under section 6(3)(A), the
Authority shall recommend to the Minister the establishment of water supply and sewer-
age areas by reference to defined limits or some other specific description.
(2) The Minister shall, by Order, establish water supply and sewerage areas based on
recommendations made to him or her under subsection (1) and every such Order shall
contain reference to the defined limits or other specific description of each area that it
concerns.
[Issue 1/2011] 18


--- PAGE 18 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(4) In determining rates, charges or fees the Board may take into consideration, whether
generally or in respect of a particular period, any or all of the following matters—
(a)
(6)
©
@
)
(g)
whether the Authority’s revenue derived from all its sources is sufficient to
cover the Authority’s expenses;
the interest payments to be made by the Authority;
the repayments of principal to be made by the Authority on any loan
secured under this Act;
the amounts that the Board thinks ought to be set aside for the Authority’s
purposes, including amounts for capital expenditure, depreciation and
reserve funds;
the purposes for which water supplied by the Authority is to be used;
in the case of water supply, sums required to meet such proportion as the
Board thinks fit of the annual costs of protecting, maintaining, improving
or rehabilitating catchment areas from which water used by the Authority is
obtained;
the extent to which water supply and sewerage is used by the public and, in
the case of any particular consumer, the extent to which that particular con-
sumer makes use of the water supply or sewerage system.
Separate or combined rates, etc., chargeable
29. Separate or combined rates, charges or fees may be fixed for the various services
provided by the Authority.
General provisions regarding rates, charges and fees
30. Without prejudice to any of the provisions of section 27, 28 or 29, rates, charges
or fees in respect of water supply or sewerage services may be fixed—
(a)
(6)
©)
@
(e)
7)
Fire service
which impose a general rate in respect of all the land, houses and buildings
situated within a particular area, so long as any part of that area is provided
with water supply or sewerage services;
which impose, in addition to a general rate, rates or charges in respect of all
land, houses or buildings provided with sewerage or, if sewerage is not
provided, wherever there exists a septic tank or similar disposal method;
which impose a minimum annual rate or charge in respect of any land or
class of land within a catchment area or sewerage area;
in relation to water supplied as measured by meter;
for the taking of water from any fire hydrant;
for the issuing or renewal of any permit or licence by the Authority.
31. There shall be no charge for water used by an official fire service in Grenada in
cases of fire or any other emergency.
[Issue 1/2011]
20


--- PAGE 19 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
by the Authority to, and does, pay the same, he or she shall be entitled to recover, as if it
were additional rent, the sum paid by him or her if it was payable by the occupier in
respect of the premises.
(4) Unpaid rates and charges shall be a lien against the premises in respect of which
the debt is incurred.
PART VII
Catchment Areas
Defining limits of catchment areas and reservation of same
36. (1) Catchment areas limited, marked out, or defined as such for waterworks exist-
ing and vested in the Government on the appointed day remain vested in the Government.
(2) Catchment areas for waterworks other than waterworks referred to in subsec-
tion (1) may be determined in accordance with regulations made under this section by the
Authority:
Provided that a map showing clearly the dimensions and limits of such catchment
areas shall be drawn and kept for public reference at the office of the Authority, and noti-
fication of the completion of such map shall be published in the Gazette.
No building to be erected on catchment area
37. No building or any other construction used or intended to be used temporarily or
permanently as a dwelling or for any other purpose shall be erected on any catchment
area unless erected by or on behalf of the Authority for its own purposes.
Catchment areas to be retained as forest reserves
38. Catchment areas for the protection, conservation and maintenance of which the
Chief Forestry Officer is responsible under any other written law shall be retained as for-
est reserves.
Catchment areas to be reserved for augmenting water supply
39. If the Minister, upon the recommendation of the Board, decides that a catchment
area is required for the purposes of preserving, extending or augmenting the water sup-
ply, the Authority shall cause the dimensions and limits thereof to be mapped and publi-
cised as provided in section 36(2); thereafter land not then already leased or sold by the
Crown shall not be granted, devised or otherwise disposed of within such limits for any
purpose whatsoever, save and except only to the Authority for its own purposes.
Power of Authority to carry out works, etc., which concern a public body
40. (1) The Authority, its agents and employees, after the giving of reasonable notice
in writing to a public body, shall have the right and the power to construct or place any part
of its works, projects, undertakings, or property, or to operate maintain and extend the same
across, in, over, under, through or along any street or any land which may now or hereafter
be the property of the public body without obtaining any franchise or permit therefor:
Provided that the Authority shall obtain the consent of the Chief Technical Officer
(Works) with respect to construction affecting any street:
[Issue 1/2011] 29,


--- PAGE 20 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
Compulsory acquisition of way-leave
42. (1) Subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this section the Minister,
if so requested by the Authority and if he or she deems it necessary or desirable, may
acquire a way-leave over land to enable the Authority to perform a duty or exercise a
power under this Act.
(2) Whenever the Authority intend that a way-leave over land be acquired, the Board
shall cause to be prepared—
(a) a detailed description (in this section referred to as “the description”) of the
proposed way-leave, including the period for which it is sought (if it is
sought for a fixed period), its location, and the purposes intended to be
secured by it; and
(b) asurvey plan (in this section referred to as “the plan”) indicating the loca-
tion of the intended way-leave.
(3) The chairperson shall give notice of intention to acquire the way-leave—
(a) _ by publication, in not less than three issues of a newspaper regularly pub-
lished and circulating in Grenada, of a notice setting forth the description,
naming a place where the plan may be inspected, and specifying the time
(which shall not be less than fourteen days from the date of the last of the
publications) and manner in which objections may be made; and
(b) by causing a like notice to be exhibited conspicuously in a convenient place
or places in or near the location of the proposed way-leave not later than
the date of the last of the publications.
(4) Within the time specified in the notice mentioned in subsection (3) any person
claiming that the granting of the way-leave will cause him or her loss, damage or injury
and wishing to object may give notice in writing to the Minister of his or her objection to
the way-leave and the grounds thereof, whereupon the Minister shall consider the
description and the plan and the notice of objection and either uphold or overrule the
objection. When the Minister overrules an objection, he or she may nevertheless direct
that the description and plan shall be modified in such manner as he or she may think fit.
The decision of the Minister shall be final and shall not be called into question in any
court.
(5) When the plan and description have been approved by the Minister, the Authority
may proceed to acquire the way-leave by publication in the Gazette of a notice that the
way-leave, as so approved, has been acquired by the Authority on the date of publication.
Power of entry of persons specially authorised by the Authority
43. It shall be lawful for any person specially authorised by the Authority to enter
upon land and premises on which the source of any water supply is located and also upon
land or premises through or under which a pipe or the line of a pipe passes or is intended
to pass. Such person shall not, if he or she has acted within the terms of his or her
authorisation, be subject or liable to any action, suit or proceeding, fine, penalty or pun-
ishment, for or in respect of such entry or his or her continuing presence upon such land
or premises.
[Issue 1/2011] 24


--- PAGE 21 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
where the licence is for the abstraction of water, for the reason that a suit-
able water supply from the Authority is already available or will be avail-
able within a reasonable period.
(5) There may be attached to a permit or licence any conditions or restrictions that
are appropriate to prevent danger to health or danger of contamination of a source of
water (including the well or borehole in question) or any prejudice to the reasonable con-
servation, control or exploitation of underground sources of water; and, without prejudice
to the generality of the foregoing all or any of the following conditions or restrictions
may be attached to a licence to abstract underground water from a well or borehole
namely—
(@)
(6)
©
@
that the pumping of water out of the well or borehole shall be carried out at
such times and at such rate as the Authority may, from time to time, fix;
that the water from the well or borehole shall not be sold to any person or
be used or permitted to be used by any person except the holder of the
licence and members of his or her household or establishment;
that the water shall not be used or permitted to be used for drinking
(whether alone or as an ingredient in any food or drink) unless the permis-
sion in writing of the Chief Medical Officer has been obtained, and that the
water shall cease to be used or permitted to be used if the Chief Medical
Officer certifies that the water is no longer fit for human consumption:
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to prohibit use of
the water for drinking as aforesaid if the water is first purified in accor-
dance with the directions of the Chief Medical Officer and to his or her sat-
isfaction;
that samples of the water obtained shall be submitted to the Authority at
any time the Authority may require.
(6) The following shall be implied conditions of a permit or licence granted under
this section, namely—
(@
(6)
©
that the Authority or any person authorised by the Authority shall have the
right of access to, and the right to inspect, the well or borehole, or the
pumping apparatus used in connection therewith, and the right to call for
and obtain such data (including geological data) in connection with the
well or borehole as it is reasonably practical to obtain;
that the Authority shall have the right to cancel the permit or licence, or to
vary or add to the conditions or restrictions thereon if its continuance in
force without such variation or addition would be open to any of the objec-
tions mentioned in subsection (4);
that the permit or licence may be cancelled by the Authority in the event of
a conviction under section 46 for the contravention of a restriction or con-
dition expressed or implied in the permit or licence.
(7) Every permit issued under this section shall be valid, unless previously cancelled,
for such period as may be specified therein or for such further period as the Authority
may allow in special circumstances.
[Issue 1/2011]
26


--- PAGE 22 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
Exception as to shallow-dug wells, etc.
49. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Act—
(a) a permit is not required to sink a shallow-dug well;
(b) a permit is not required to deepen or convert a shallow-dug well unless
after the well has been deepened or converted it will cease to be a shallow-
dug well;
(c) a licence is not required to abstract water from a shallow-dug well unless such
well is used or intended to be used to provide water for drinking purposes;
(da) a permit or licence is not required in relation to any well or borehole used
or intended to be used for the disposal of sewage water or other waste when
the depth of such well or borehole is not more than five feet:
Provided that the Minister may, by Order, declare an area to be one within which
permits and licences must be obtained even if the depth of any well or borehole as afore-
said does not exceed five feet.
Minister may give directions
50. The Minister may, after consultation with the Board, give to the Board general
guidelines or guidelines of a specific nature relating to the policy of the Government with
regard to water supply and sewage disposal; and the Board shall be obliged to follow
such guidelines in the performance of the duties and exercise of the powers of the
Authority.
Financial assistance for families earning low income
51. (1) Subject to regulations under section 52 the Authority may not connect any
person to the water supply or sewerage system free of charge.
(2) The Minister may establish a fund, out of monies voted for the purpose by Par-
liament, to assist families earning a low income to finance domestic water and sewerage
installations; and the Minister may make regulations governing the operation of that fund.
Regulations
52. (1) The Authority may, with the approval in writing of the Minister, and subject
as directed by the Minister, make regulations generally for the purposes of this Act and in
particular for—
(a) regulating and controlling the type, specification, location, construction,
repair, removal or alteration of any water main, service pipe, valve, hydrant,
standpipe, and any other work in or upon premises that form part of or are
connected with waterworks;
(6) regulating and controlling the manner in which the service pipes of users of
water are to be connected to water mains;
(c) regulating and controlling the location, construction, repair, removal or
alteration of any sewer, drain-pipe, manhole, gully trap, and any other work
in or upon premises that form part of or are connected with sewage works;
[Issue 1/2011] 28


--- PAGE 23 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(v) empowering the Authority, after reasonable notice given in writing, to dis-
connect a water supply to any property in respect of which there remain
unpaid, any water or sewerage rates; and
(w) — any other matter or thing, whether similar to any of the foregoing or not,
for the purpose of the better carrying out of the purposes and provisions of
this Act.
(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may be made applicable either generally or with
respect to any specified water supply or sewerage area established under section 27(2) or
to any defined part thereof, and for the purposes of this subsection “area” includes any
area the limits or description of which have been varied pursuant to section 27(3).
(3) If within three months after being directed by the Minister to make regulations the
Authority fails to do so in relation to all or any of the matters specified in the direction
the Minister may revoke the direction and may himself or herself make the regulations;
and whilst those regulations are in force, the Authority may not make regulations con-
cerning matters included in the regulations made by the Minister.
(4) Regulations made by the Minister under subsection (3) shall have effect as if they
had been made by the Authority.
(5) Regulations made under this section shall bind the Government.
(6) The Minister acting upon the advice of the Authority may, by Order, exempt any
person from the regulations or any of them made under this section or any provision
thereof.
(7) Regulations made under this section may include provisions for—
(a) _ the alteration, repair or replacement of any installation or fitting which con-
travenes the regulations;
(b) the disconnection of the water supply to any property in respect of which
any contravention of the regulations has occurred.
(8) Regulations made under this section may fix separate charges for separate ser-
vices or facilities, or combined charges for more than one service or facility; and nothing
in any enactment or in any agreement or arrangement shall operate, in relation to the
Authority, so as to require the fixing of separate charges for separate services or facilities.
(9) Regulations under this section may be given retrospective effect.
Penalty if water or sewerage connection made without permission
53. If it is found that a connection has been made between premises and the water
supply or sewerage system without the permission of the Authority the owner and occu-
pier of such premises shall in the absence of lawful excuse be guilty of an offence and
jointly or severally liable, on summary conviction, to a fine of one thousand dollars.
[Issue 1/2011] 30


--- PAGE 24 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act
(4) The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Deputy Chairperson or the person
elected by the directors present to act as Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings of the
Board.
(5) The quorum of the Board shall be five directors one of whom shall be the Chair-
person or Deputy Chairperson.
(6) The decisions of the Board shall be by a majority vote.
Committees
2. The Board may establish committees consisting of members of the Board and
other persons to examine and report to it on any matter arising out of or connected with
its duties under this Act.
Tenure of directors
3. A director shall hold office for two years and shall be eligible for re-appointment.
Resignation of director
4. (1) A director, other than the Chairperson, may at any time resign his or her
office by written notice addressed to the Minister and transmitted through the Chairper-
son and from the date of the receipt by the Minister of the notice the director ceases to be
a director.
(2) The Chairperson may at any time resign his or her office by one month’s written
notice addressed to the Minister, and such resignation shall take effect on the expiration
of one month from the date of the notice.
Removal of director
5. The Minister may at any time revoke the appointment of a director if that director—
(a) _ is of unsound mind and is incapable of carrying out his or her duties;
(b) is convicted of an offence involving dishonesty;
(c) _ is guilty of misconduct in relation to his or her duties;
(d) _ is absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board without permission
of the Board; or
(e) fails to carry out his or her duties under this Act.
Declaration
6. (1) A director who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly interested,
whether pecuniary or otherwise, in a contract or proposed contract with the Authority or
any other matter in which the Authority is concerned, shall declare the nature of his or
her interest at the first meeting of the Board at which he or she is present.
(2) A director shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Board with
respect to any contract or proposed contract with the Authority or any other matter with
which the Authority is concerned in which he or she is directly or indirectly interested,
whether pecuniary or otherwise.
[Issue 1/2011] 32


--- PAGE 25 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
FIRST SCHEDULE
Building Sewer Work
SECOND SCHEDULE
Construction Specifications
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
SEWERAGE REGULATIONS
[SRO 40 of 1993.]
[10th September, 1993.]
Citation
1. These Regulations may be cited as the National Water and Sewerage Authority
Sewerage Regulations.
Definitions
2. In these Regulations—
“biochemical oxygen demand” or “B.O.D.” means the quantity of oxygen utilised
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at twenty degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per litre;
“building sewer” means any culvert, pipe and accessory extending from a building
for carrying off sewage or industrial waste to a public sewer;
“defined district” means an area served by a public sewer;
“garbage” means solid waste from domestic or commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of any produce;
“industrial waste” means the liquid waste from industrial manufacturing proc-
esses, trade or business;
“natural outlet” means any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground of water;
“public sewer” means any sanitary sewer under the control of or maintained by the
Authority for carrying off sewage or industrial waste from a building sewer;
“sanitary fixture” means any receptacle that receives water or other liquid or
water-borne waste and discharges it into a drainage system to which the fixture is
directly or indirectly connected;
“sanitary sewer” means any artificial conduit used for the conveyance of sewage
into which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally allowed to flow;
[Issue 1/2011] 42


--- PAGE 26 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
Premises required to be connected
5. (1) The owner or occupier of any premises within a defined district shall connect all
sources of waste water within the premises, excluding rain or surface water to a public sewer
and the owner or occupier of the premises is liable to meet the costs of the connection.
(2) The Authority may by notice in writing requite the owner or occupier of any
premises referred to in subregulation (1) to connect the premises to the public sewer
within a reasonable time not being less than ninety (90) days and not more than one hun-
dred and eighty (180) days as is specified in the notice.
(3) Where the notice referred to in subregulation (2) is not complied with, the Authority
may carry out the necessary work and recover the expenses incurred from the person on
whom the notice was served.
(4) In proceedings for the recovery of expenses mentioned in subregulation (3) the
court may consider—
(a) whether any requirement contained in a notice referred to in this Regula-
tion was reasonable; and
(b) whether the expenses ought to be borne wholly or in part by some person
other than the defendant to the proceedings, and the court may make such
Order concerning the expenses or their apportionment as seems to the court
to be just.
(5) A court may not order expenses referred to in subregulation (4) or to any part of
the expenses to be borne by any person other than the defendant to the proceedings unless
the court is satisfied that the other person had due notice of the proceedings and an oppor-
tunity to be heard.
Ships to dispose of sewage into public sewer
6. (1) Ships within the territorial waters of Grenada shall dispose of their sewage to
the public sewer.
(2) The Authority shall make provision at all harbours, ports and other havens within
a defined district for the reception, storage and discharge to the public sewer of sewage
from ships.
Prohibition of discharge to natural outlets, etc.
7. No person shall, in any defined district—
(a) discharge sewage or industrial waste to any natural outlet, the ocean, or the
land; or
(6) construct new or rehabilitate old septic tanks, cesspools, privies or other
facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage or industrial waste.
[Issue 1/2011] 44


--- PAGE 27 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
(vii) cadmium,
(viii) formaldehydes,
(ix) lead,
(x) mercury,
(xi) phenols and their derivatives,
(xii) sulphonamides,
(xiii) zine compounds,
(xiv) strong oxidising agents such as chromates, dichromates, permanga-
nates and peroxide,
(xv) chemical compounds producing toxic, inflammable or explosive
gases, either upon acidification, alkalisation, oxidation, or reduction,
(xvi) _ strong reducing agents such as nitrites, sulphides, sulphites and thi-
osulphates;
(d) highly coloured matters and those creating excessively offensive odours;
and
(e) waste of whatever kind that cannot be satisfactorily purified by the normal
processes of sewage treatment.
(5) No person shall discharge grease or any other noxious substance into any public
sewer.
(6) Where a sink at a hotel, restaurant, boarding house, laundry or other place where
grease or other noxious substance is used is connected to the public sewer, the hotel, res-
taurant, boarding house, laundry or place shall be provided with a grease trap of a design
approved by the Authority.
(7) Industrial waste from garages, motor vehicle service station, or places where
mechanical vehicles or other machines are washed shall, before being discharged over a
trapped gully basin, be drained through a properly constructed grease trap of a design
approved by the Authority.
(8) A grease trap shall be cleaned as often as may be necessary to maintain it in a
sanitary condition.
Food grinders
10. Waste matter from commercial and domestic food-grinders and similar appli-
ances may only be discharged into a public sewer with the permission of the Authority
and under such conditions as the Authority determines.
Swimming pools
11. Waste water from swimming pools may only be discharged into the public sewer
under such conditions and at such rate of flow as the Authority authorises in each particu-
lar case.
[Issue 1/2011] 46


--- PAGE 28 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
with the requirements, and until the sewer becomes a public sewer, the Authority shall
also repay him or her so much of any expenses reasonably incurred by him or her in
repairing or maintaining the sanitary sewer that are attributable to the requirement.
(4) Where any question arises as to the amount of any payment to be made to any
person under subregulation (3) the question may, on his or her application, be determined
by a court of summary jurisdiction, or if he or she so requires, be referred to arbitration.
Private facilities
15. Every owner or occupier of premises on which any sanitary sewer, water closet,
urinal, slop sink or other sanitary installation has been installed or is being installed, and
every person who is or has been concerned in the installation of any sanitary sewer, water
closet, urinal, slop sink or other sanitary installation on any premises shall ensure that the
sanitary sewer, water closet, urinal, slop sink or other installation has been or is being
installed and is maintained in accordance with regulations.
No work to be done without consent of Authority
16. No person shall, without the consent of the Authority, install, alter or remove any
building sewer, water closet, urinal, slop sink, bidet, lavatory, bath, cistern or any other
sanitary fixture necessary for the conveyance of sewage, house slops, or waste water
from any premises to a public sewer.
Authority to keep maps
17. (1) The Authority shall keep at its office, for inspection by any person at all rea-
sonable hours, a map showing and distinguishing public sewers.
(2) The Authority may not charge a fee for inspection of the map referred to in
subregulation (1).
Form of application
18. (1) Any person, hereinafter referred to as “the applicant” who, being the owner
or occupier of premises, wishes to execute at the premises any building sewer work, or to
extend or alter old or new work, excluding the repair of leaks, connected with a public
sewer shall apply to the Authority for permission to execute the work.
(2) An application made pursuant to subregulation (1)—
(a) must be in accordance with Form 1 or 2, as the case may be, in the First
Schedule;
(b) must be accompanied by plans in quadruplicate showing the connections,
locations and fixtures from the junction of the public sewer to the termina-
tion above the roof of the building; and
(c) must be accompanied by any incidental information the Authority requires.
[Issue 1/2011] 48


--- PAGE 29 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
Plans to be property of the Authority
22. Where the Authority approves plans under regulation 19 the Manager shall—
(a) _ send one copy of the plans to the applicant;
(b) send one to the Ministry of Health; and
(c) __ retain the other copies for the purposes of the Authority.
Approved plans to be adhered to
23. (1) Plans approved by the Authority shall be strictly adhered to in the execution
of the work.
(2) No deviation from the approved plans may be made, except with the consent in
writing of the Authority and any deviation sanctioned by him or her shall be clearly
marked on the plan and initialled by the Authority.
Levels to be referred to a fixed datum
24. Where necessary, levels inscribed on plans mentioned in these Regulations shall
be referred to the datum plane adopted by the Authority, and the Authority shall furnish
on request the elevations of relevant available benchmarks.
The level and position of the point of junction
25. (1) The approximate level and position of the point of junction of proposed
work with a public sewer shall be furnished by the Authority on application in writing
being made to the Manager.
(2) The exact level mentioned in subregulation (1) shall be determined by opening
the ground if necessary and exposing the pipe; and building sewers shall be so designed
as to connect properly with the point of junction.
Notice prior to commencement of work
26. (1) Where building sewer plans are approved by the Authority and returned to
an applicant, the applicant shall, by notice in writing notify the Authority of the date on
which the applicant intends to begin work.
(2) After pipes and other appurtenances have been laid, but before pipe-trenches have
been filled in or before the pipes and other appurtenances have been covered or concealed
in any manner, the applicant or his or her accredited agent shall give notice in writing to
the Authority that the work is ready for inspection.
(3) The Authority shall within two working days of the receipt of the notice referred
to in subregulation (2) arrange to have the work inspected and tested and if the work is
approved, a certificate shall promptly be issued to the applicant who shall then cover the
work.
(4) Where before the expiration of the two working days mentioned in subregula-
tion (3) any work has been covered before it has been inspected and approved, the appli-
cant shall, at his or her own cost, upon the request of the Authority, immediately uncover
the work.
[Issue 1/2011] 50


--- PAGE 30 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
Junction pipes installed by the Authority
33. (1) A side junction for building sewers for each premises shall be inserted as
required in all sewer mains in streets and lanes, and in every case a pipe shall be laid by
or at the expense of the Authority from the sewer to a point on the boundary of the prem-
ises at which point the junction of the building sewer shall be met with the pipe.
(2) The position and level of each point of junction shall be fixed by the Manager.
Junction pipe provided by the Authority
34. (1) The Authority shall provide, free of cost, one junction and pipe from a main
sewer for any one premises.
(2) Where it is necessary to provide more than one junction and pipe mentioned in
subregulation (1) the cost of the additional junction and pipe shall be borne by the applicant.
(3) The applicant shall pay the cost of providing any additional junction and pipe
before—
(a) the plan relating to any work to be done in connection with the provision of
the junction and pipe is returned to the applicant; and
(b) any work in connection with the junction and pipe is carried out.
(4) The position of every additional pipe mentioned in subregulation (1) as shown on
the plan shall be indicated on the ground by the applicant.
Penal clause
35. Any person who contravenes any of these Regulations is guilty of an offence and
is liable on summary conviction to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprison-
ment for twelve months, or both; and in the case of a continuing offence to a further fine
of one hundred dollars ($100) for each day or part thereof during which the offence con-
tinues after a conviction is first obtained.
FIRST SCHEDULE
Building Sewer Work
FORM 1
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE
AUTHORITY ACT
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
SEWERAGE REGULATIONS
Application for Premises to be Connected to Public Sewer
[Regulation 18(2).]
1. Situation of premises
Name and Number on Street
2. Name and address of owner
[Issue 1/2011] 52


--- PAGE 31 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
FIRST SCHEDULE—continued
FORM 2
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE
AUTHORITY ACT
NATIONAL WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY
SEWERAGE REGULATIONS
Application for Extension, Alteration or Repair of Building Sewer
[Regulation 18(2).]
1. Situation of premises
Name and Number on Street
2. Name and address of owner
3. Name of tenant and nature of...
tenancy aoe
4. Nature and extent of proposed ...
extensions, alterations or
repairs to closet, drain or
sanitary appliances or fittings...
5. Description ofwater closet and
flush tank to be used
6. Name of Sanitary Constructor
by whom the work is to be
executed
General Remarks:
Signature of Applicant
Address
Date
The Manager
National Water and Sewerage Authority
Carenage
ST. GEORGE’S
Note.—Plans in quadruplicate showing the location of existing sewers, etc., and indicating the
proposed alterations, or extensions, must accompany this application and no work must be
commenced until such plans have been approved.
[Issue 1/2011] 54


--- PAGE 32 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
Joints of iron pipes
7. (1) The joints of soil, waste and ventilating pipes, except where screw joints are used
shall be formed with good quality jointing materials so that the joints are gas and water tight.
Special jointing compounds, other than that specified by the pipe Manufacturer may, by per-
mission of the Authority be used.
(2) Flanged rubber compression ring or other mechanical joints when approved by the
Authority may be used in special circumstances.
Screwed Joints
8. (1) In the case of screwed wrought iron or steel joints, red lead or other approved
jointing compound approved by the Authority must be used in making the joint.
(2) No paint or putty or running thread shall be used in making screwed joints.
Copper pipes
9. Joints on copper pipes may be of the soldered sleeve type or of such mechanical or
compression type as the Authority may approve.
Connection of iron and lead
10. (1) All connections of lead pipes with iron pipes must be made with brass sleeve or
ferrule of pipes the same size as the lead pipe.
(2) The lead pipe shall be attached to the ferrule by a wiped solder joint.
Location of inspection chambers
11. Inspection chambers shall be provided in the following positions—
(a) at every point in a building sewer where two or more sewer lines converge, but
in certain cases, with the permission in writing of the Authority ground connec-
tions may be made by means of “Y” branches;
(b) at every point in a building sewer where any angle, bend, change in gradient or
alteration in size occurs;
(c) at every point in sewer line where there occurs a change in the type of pipe such
as from metal to non-metal or from non-metal to metal pipes; and
(d) at such points in the building sewer so that no part of the sewer line is more than
fifteen metres from the centre of an inspection chamber unless a greater distance
is approved in writing by the Authority.
Design of Inspection chambers
12. (1) Every inspection chamber or manhole—
(a) must be not less than 900 millimetres long and 750 millimetres wide internally;
and
(b) must be fitted with a strong cast iron manhole frame and movable cover of ade-
quate size, design and construction approved by the Authority and the cover
must be fixed not lower than the surface of the adjoining ground or floor.
(2) The frame must be securely bedded in cement mortar made of one part cement and
three parts sand with an adequate fillet around the exterior so that the frame cannot move.
(3) The minimum size of clear opening for covers on inspection chambers is 450 milli-
metres.
[Issue 1/2011] 56


--- PAGE 33 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
Gully basins, etc., inside buildings
18. (1) Where it is impracticable for any gully basin or inspection chamber to be
located outside a building or where, on account of subsequent building extensions or altera-
tions, a gully basin or inspection chamber falls within any building, covered way, or area, the
gully basin must be fitted with a specially sealed cover.
(2) The cover must be both water-tight and air-tight and must be bolted or so secured to
the frame of the basin or chamber that it may be readily removed and replaced when necessary
for inspection or cleaning.
(3) Notwithstanding subregulations (1) and (2) cast iron access with bolted water-tight
covers of a design approved by the Authority may be securely fitted in the chamber frame
instead of a sealed cover.
(4) Every sealed gully basin must be adequately ventilated by means of a pipe not less
than 50 millimetres in internal diameter.
Pipes in soft ground
19. Where sewer pipes are run through soft or yielding ground they shall be laid with
the use of such materials and methods and with such conditions as the Authority directs.
Sewer not to be run under buildings
20. No person shall lay a sewer under any building, unless the Authority certifies in
writing that in its opinion it is impracticable or inexpedient to do otherwise.
Sewer under buildings
21. Where it is necessary to lay any sewer under a building the sewer shall be laid with
the use of such materials and methods and with such conditions as the Authority directs.
Building shall not be constructed over sewers
22. No person shall construct a building over an existing building sewer except with the
written permission of the Authority.
No rain water pipe to be used for sewage
23. A pipe used for carrying off rain water from the roof of any building shall not be
used—
(a) for carrying off sewage or industrial waste;
(6) as ventilating pipe or antisiphon pipe for any sewer, soil pipe or trap.
Rain water to be excluded from gullies and inlets
24. (1) Gullies or other inlets connected with building sewers—
(a) must be raised above ground level; and
(b) must be surrounded with a concrete kerb not less than 150 millimetres high or
otherwise protected against the ingress of rain or surface water.
(2) Condensation and waste cooling water from air conditioning plants shall be dis-
charged over trapped gully basins.
(3) No rain or surface water shall be allowed to enter any sanitary sewer.
[Issue 1/2011] 58


--- PAGE 34 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
(2) Ventilating pipes shall be run separately or combined together to a point at least 600
millimetres above the eaves of the building.
Air-gap in fixtures
30. An adequate air-gap of not less than 25 millimetres shall be provided through free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or delivery cock supplying water to
any tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim or overflow of the receptacle.
Pattern to be approved
31. (1) All water closets, bidets, and fittings connected therewith must be of patterns,
and conform with standards, approved by the Authority.
(2) Each water closet—
(a) must be capable of being kept clean with a flush of water of not more than
9 litres for each time the closet is used; and
(6) shall be provided with a trap or siphon, placed near to the pan and capable of
maintaining a sufficient and effective water seal.
Flush tank
32. Every water closet shall be provided—
(a) with a siphonic waste-preventing flush tank of satisfactory pattern; or
(6) with a flush-tank of such other type as the Authority may approve.
Maximum capacity
33. No person shall use a tank giving a greater flush than 9 litres per closet.
Stop cock
34, The water service pipe to every flush tank shall be provided with a stop cock.
Overflow pipe
35. Every flush-tank shall be provided with an overflow pipe, which must be discharge
into open air and not into soil pipe, and the overflow pipe shall be arranged in such a manner
as to act as a warning pipe.
Flushing valves
36. Where automatic flushing valves or flushometres are used, the valves must be of a
waste-preventing type and must be supplied by a pipe of adequate size from a tank giving a
volume of water under sufficient head to allow the flushing valves to operate satisfactorily and
discharge at each separate operation a volume of water of not more than 9 litres per closet.
Water Closet in upper floors
37. (1) Water closets installed on upper floors shall be connected to soil pipes of cast-
iron, steel, PVC or such other materials as the Authority approves.
(2) The soil pipes mentioned in subregulation (1)—
(a) must be not less than 100 millimetres in diameter;
(6) must be jointed with approved jointing material or compound;
(c) must be, wherever practicable outside the building or in a pipe duct within the
building.
[Issue 1/2011] 60


--- PAGE 35 ---

CAP. 208
National Water and Sewerage Authority Act — Subsidiary Legislation
(2) A tank shall be so installed as to be separate and distinct from any tank for drinking
water.
(3) Every flush tank must be capable of being filled in not more than twenty-five min-
utes or such less period as might be necessary for the satisfactory cleansing of the fixture; and
the supply pipe to every such tank, shall be fitted with two effective stop cocks in easily
accessible positions, one stop cock being of the screw down type for regulating the supply to
the tank and the other for shutting off the supply.
[Issue 1/2011] 62
