REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU

OFFICIAL GAZETTE

Monday, 17 September 1992

Number 37

Matters for publication in the "Official Gazette" must be sent with the original and a duplicate, duly authenticated by the responsible entity, to the General Directorate of Public Administration - Publications Department... in order to authorize their publication.

Requests for subscriptions or individual issues of the "Official Gazette" should be addressed to the Commercial Directorate of INACEP - National Press, Public Company - Avenida do Brasil, P.O. Box 287 - 1204 Bissau Codex - Bissau, Guinea-Bissau.

SUPPLEMENT

SUMMARY
PART I

Council of State:
Decree-Law No. 5-A/92.
Approves the Water Code.

PART I
COUNCIL OF STATE

Decree-Law 5-A/92
of 17 September

One of the great concerns of governments in modern times is undoubtedly the scarcity of freshwater, the manifest shortage of terrestrial water resources, which are being progressively degraded, mainly by new chemical products, implying a constant decrease in the resources of usable water for the supply of populations, agriculture, and industry.

The reduction of usable liquid reserves is further aggravated by the growth of the world's population, which is proceeding at a practically geometric rate (in the year 2000, it is capable of reaching seven billion inhabitants).

Guinea-Bissau possesses important water resources, both surface and subterranean, globally superior to the country's current needs. Nevertheless, the concentration of users in specific areas can cause local over-exploitation and conflicts. The considerable decrease in usable water resources due to prolonged drought, and pollution by liquid and solid waste, constitute risks that threaten the conservation of resources or their orderly exploitation.

On the other hand, Guinea-Bissau does not have a legislative tradition regarding water; the inherited legislation, Decree No. 35 463, had practically no application. The only legal framework in force is Law No. 4175 and the Constitution of 1984.

The United Nations Water Conference of Mar del Plata, which sanctioned what had already been declared at the Valencia and Caracas Conferences, considers that legislation which is not supported by a water resources management policy can hardly be effective. The water law must be conceived as a set of principles and norms that inform the action of the State, having as objectives the planned exploitation, conservation, and optimization of the management of water resources. To achieve these objectives more easily and, according to the experience of other countries, the declaration of public domain of water is necessary, with an inalienable and imprescriptible character.

Another fundamental problem that was taken into account in the elaboration of this code was the respect for the principle of the hydrological cycle. Water is one, whatever the situation and the physical state in which it is found: solid, liquid, or gaseous. The precipitation, infiltration, runoff, and evaporation of surface and subterranean waters are interrelated in a cycle that is permanently renewed.

From the unity of the hydrological cycle should derive the unity of the legal regime of waters, a unitary and uniform regime of water resources.

It becomes imperative, therefore, to establish systematically, a homogeneous body of more efficient legal principles and norms with a view to solving the complex water problem, always with the concern of making the legal order compatible with the need for growth and development imperatives. Only then can the creation of disastrous situations, already occurred in other countries, be avoided, without, however, prejudicing the intended socio-economic development.

Having a legal instrument to face these situations is the reason for the need for a WATER CODE.

Other principles enshrined therein are, namely, the insertion into the natural framework of hydrographic basins, the fight against pollution, the prior licensing for the opening of wells and boreholes for the abstraction and extraction of groundwater, the planned management of water resources, and the introduction of fees to be borne by users to pay the costs derived from the use of works of hydraulic interest and to obtain better protection and improvement in the public water domain.

In these terms:

The Council of State decrees, under the terms of No. 2 of Article 64 of the Constitution, the following:

WATER CODE

CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 1
(Object)

This Decree-Law on waters has the objective of:

a) Defining the general legal regime of all activities related to the management of water resources;
b) Defining the institutional and normative framework for the execution of the general policy of water management for the benefit of the entire population and the economic and social interest of the country;
c) Ensuring the execution of the policy of managing the water resources of Guinea-Bissau in whatever form they may present themselves;
d) Ensuring the inventory and utilization, exploitation, and most rational supervision of water resources and their administration;
e) Regulating all use for domestic, agricultural, industrial, hydroelectric, and other purposes;
f) Ensuring the qualitative protection of waters against pollution, waste, and over-exploitation;

ARTICLE 2
(Of the public domain)

The following are part of the public domain of water resources:

a) All water resources in whatever form they may present themselves: atmospheric, surface, and subterranean;
b) Water sources of whatever nature they may be;
c) The territorial sea;
d) The beds of surface waters, natural, continuous, and discontinuous;
e) All hydraulic works and equipment and their dependencies, carried out with the objective of public use by the State or on its behalf.

ARTICLE 3
(Of inalienability)

The State's water domain is inalienable and imprescriptible and cannot be subject to private property.

Individuals, collectivities, public and private companies may only obtain rights of use according to this Decree-Law.

The State recognizes and guarantees traditional use rights within the scope of this Decree-Law and the regulatory titles granted for their execution.

ARTICLE 4
(Of the administration of waters)

The public domain of water resources is administered by the Ministry responsible for water through the General Directorate of Water Resources (DGRH), in cooperation with other concerned authorities, according to the provisions of this Decree-Law and its implementing regulations.

Administrative acts in the public water domain give the right to compensation fixed by the administration or by the competent court when they cause prejudice to third parties.

ARTICLE 5
(Of the general policy of water management)

The Ministry responsible for water, through the General Directorate of Water Resources, will progressively implement, in the regions defined by it for priority intervention, the execution of this Decree-Law for the realization of the following objectives:

a) The progressive preparation of a general and concrete inventory of the available water resources in the country, both quantitative and qualitative, and its periodic updating;
b) The creation, in relation to the entire national territory or in relation to the main hydrographic basins, of a cadastre of water users. In the cadastre of water users will be registered the declarations, authorizations, and concessions of use and discharge of waters, their characteristics, as well as all modifications they may undergo. A dispatch from the Minister responsible for water will determine the rules of organization and functioning of the cadastre of water users.
c) The progressive preparation of one or various Water Management plans that will be established in relation to hydrographic basins, sub-basins, sets of basins at the national level.
d) To promote, with due respect for the proper competencies of other State Departments, the necessary actions of international cooperation in matters of water resources and to ensure their application at the national level.
e) To promote, if necessary, in collaboration with other interested parties, a progressive action with a view to the establishment of regional water management administrations organized on the basis of the main hydrographic basins and having a multi-functional and pluridisciplinary vocation.
f) To encourage, as far as possible, the initiatives of local State bodies, populations, water users, and public and private companies in the domain of water management in cooperation with other interested departments. While the State ensures the technical supervision of the projects and their execution, a regulatory diploma may specify these activities.

CHAPTER II
ADMINISTRATION OF WATERS

ARTICLE 6
(Of the general regime of use)

The use of waters of the public domain shall be subject to the administrative control of the State.

No natural or legal person, of public or private law, may withdraw or use water from the public water domain without being duly authorized under the terms of this Decree-Law and the regulatory diplomas that may be adopted for its execution.

The right to use waters of the public domain shall be subject to the following regimes:

a) Free use, within the scope of Article 7;
b) Declaration of use, under the terms of Article 8;
c) Authorizations of use, under the terms of Articles 9, 11, and 12;
d) Concessions of use, under the terms of Articles 10, 11, and 12 of this Decree-Law.

ARTICLE 7
(Of free use)

The owner or usufructuary of a piece of land has the right to freely use the rainwater that falls on their land, and other waters of the public domain, with a view to satisfying the domestic, personal, and family needs of the users, including the watering of livestock and the irrigation of their garden, with traditional means and without mechanical means.

In cases of artificial accumulation of waters for the above-mentioned uses, the owner or usufructuary may be required to declare the capacity and nature of their installations.

While respecting the orientations of this article, regulatory provisions may specify and even limit on a general or local basis the exceptions provided for by this article, namely in a situation of exceptional scarcity.

ARTICLE 8
(Of the declaration of use)

All uses of water of a non-free character shall be subject to the regime of declaration of use, that is:

a) All permanent or non-permanent installations that allow the withdrawal of subterranean or surface waters by mechanical means. By mechanical means is understood any equipment that uses non-traditional abstraction means;
b) All installations or works that, without involving mechanical means, constitute uses of non-free water under the terms of Article 7 of this Decree-Law.

ARTICLE 9
(Of the authorization of use)

The following shall be subject to the regime of authorization of use:

a) The uses of waters of the public water domain whose use is not free use under the terms of Article 7 of this Decree-Law or that are not subject to the regime of concessions of exploitation;
b) Deposits, plantations, and cultures on the banks and in the bed of watercourses and lakes;
c) Works of investigation and abstraction of subterranean waters, use or exploitation of these waters;
d) The extraction of sand, stones, and earth from the bed of a river or lake or from its banks.

ARTICLE 10
(Of the concessions of use)

Concessions for the use of water shall normally be concluded between the Ministry responsible for water and public or private legal persons whose installation or activities are of a character of general interest or public use or who are concessionaires of a public service. Concessions for the use of water are renewable.

ARTICLE 11
(Of the extinction of concessions)

Concessions for the exploitation of water terminate for one of the following reasons:

a) Expiration of the term of the concession, except in the case of extension;
b) Rescission of the term of the concession;
c) Rescission as a sanction for disrespect of contractual obligations;
d) Rescission for non-use of the waters for a period of 1 (one) year;
e) For reasons of force majeure that may have led to the temporary or definitive disappearance of the water.

ARTICLE 12
(Of the common provisions for authorizations and concessions of use)

Authorizations and concessions for the use of water are:

a) Personal and non-transferable, without the agreement of the granting administration;
b) Granted subject to the rights of third parties;
c) Renewable subject to the modifications introduced by the granting administration in the general interest;
d) Revocable, modifiable, or reducible for reasons of general interest or in case of extraordinary circumstances, such as, among others, the conservation of the quantity or quality of the water, the supply of populations with drinking water in case of extreme droughts, to prevent or stop the damages caused by the water. In case of permanent revocation, the beneficiary shall have the right to compensation fixed by the administration or by the competent court;
e) Revocable for disrespect by the holder of their obligations after notification;
f) Susceptible to payments of use fees, the amount and conditions of which shall be established by regulatory means;
g) Granted according to the availability of the waters, other competing applications, and according to the provisions of the water plan;
h) Registered in the Cadastre of users.

Authorizations for concessions of water use:

a) May be declared of public utility either officially or at the request of the concessionaire: in this case, the public domain may be used for the execution of works;
b) Shall be limited to the uses of water provided for in the titles, and to any technical conditions of exploitation established by the competent authority, such as maximum instantaneous and annual abstraction flows, minimum distances between abstractions, construction requirements of the equipment, conditions for the discharge of used waters, and others.

In case of competing petitions, priority shall be given to those that:

a) Were presented on an earlier date;
b) Better satisfy the general interest;
c) Are in conformity with the priorities and norms fixed by the water plan.

ARTICLE 13
(Of the refusal of authorization or concessions)

Requests for authorization may be rejected if the needs to be satisfied are not justified, if their satisfaction compromises the quantitative and qualitative protection of the water, if they are contrary to the interests of the national economy or contrary to the duly established rights of third parties.

Any rejection must be justified.

The water administration may require the petitioner to modify their request for authorizations or concessions to satisfy the needs of general interest.

ARTICLE 14
(Of the general obligations of users)

The general obligations of users are the following:

a) To use water in a rational and economic manner;
b) To respect the conditions established in the act constituting the right;
c) To ensure the quality of the water;
d) To respect the rights of other legitimate users of the waters.

CHAPTER III
PLANNING OF WATER RESOURCES

ARTICLE 15
(Of planning)

The use of water resources shall be the object of planning, contained in the Water Master Plan.

The general objective of planning is to achieve a better supply for the needs of water, increasing availability, and aiming at the protection of the quality of the waters, and the rationalization of their use in harmony with other natural resources, territorial planning, and ecological balance.

ARTICLE 16
(Of the Master Plan)

The Water Master Plan shall be approved by the Interministerial Water Committee (CIMA), drafted in coordination with the general planning of the country, and shall be the object of periodic updating and revision.

Its prescriptions shall be obligatory for the different concerned administrations.

ARTICLE 17
(Of the content of the Master Plan)

The Water Master Plan shall comprise, at least, the following elements:

a) The inventory of water resources;
b) The hydraulic works, uses, and needs of existing and foreseen water;
c) The criteria of preference and definition of priorities among the different uses and exploitations;
d) Allocation and reservation of water resources for current and future uses and needs, as well as for the conservation or recovery of the natural environment;
e) The basic norms for the use and protection of aquifers;
f) The main characteristics of water quality, and measures for its protection;
g) The basic norms for the different uses of water, which should permit and guarantee the best management of water resources and lands;
h) The protection perimeters with the measures for protection and recovery of the concerned water resources;
i) The hydraulic programs and projects to be carried out by the Administration;
j) The basic infrastructures necessary for the realization of the Master Plan;
k) The measures of a technical, economic, institutional, or legal order that will permit the development of the Plan.

CHAPTER IV
SERVITUDES (EASEMENTS)

ARTICLE 18
(Of servitudes)

The lower lands are subject to receiving the waters that naturally flow from the upper lands, as well as the earth and stones carried by the water.

Neither the owner of the lower land can erect works that impede these servitudes, nor the owner of the upper land can erect works that aggravate them.

ARTICLE 19
(Of legal servitudes)

The applicants of authorizations and concessions for the use of waters may request that the servitudes necessary for the evacuation or passage for the canalization of the waters or for the establishment of a drinking trough or the construction of a reservoir be included in the authorizations and concessions. This inclusion may be effected provided that there is an agreement with the owner or usufructuary of the land to be used and may eventually provide for the indemnities or rights that this use entails.

ARTICLE 20
(Of servitudes of public interest)

The water administration has the right to install all means of signage, measurement, water control, as well as any other necessary installation, as well as the means of access to these installations.

Those who have a right to these servitudes must abstain from anything that may exceed the reason for which the servitude was established.

The modalities of exercise and extinction of the servitudes provided for in articles 18 and 20 shall be regulated.

CHAPTER V
SPECIAL PROVISIONS ON VARIOUS USES

ARTICLE 21
(Of the supply of drinking water)

Under the terms of this Decree-Law, drinking water includes water intended for drinking and for domestic uses, mineral waters for direct consumption, as well as those intended for the manufacture of carbonated beverages and ice, preparation and conservation of food and products intended for human consumption.

The Ministry responsible for water shall authorize the plans, projects, and works intended for the supply of drinking water, which must be carried out in accordance with the policy, planning, and existing norms for this sector.

The supply of drinking water shall be subject to respect for the norms aimed at ensuring the quality of the water under the terms and conditions established by the Ministry responsible for public health.

If difficulties in the supply of drinking water arise, the use, exploitation, and consumption of water may be regulated under the terms fixed by the Ministry responsible for water in conjunction with the Ministry of Public Health.

ARTICLE 22
(Of irrigation)

Water users for irrigation purposes shall proceed with an intensive exploitation and a maximum valorization of the water resources.

The use of untreated domestic or industrial wastewater for irrigation is prohibited.

In respect of the general provisions of the Law, namely of this chapter, and if convenient, a joint dispatch of the Ministers responsible for Water and Agriculture may specify the regime of use of waters for agricultural purposes and the existing connection between the use of waters and of the land.

ARTICLE 23
(Of fishing and pisciculture)

Fishing and pisciculture in the waters of the public domain are governed by the legislative and regulatory provisions in force in this matter.

Notwithstanding, an opinion shall be requested from the Ministry responsible for water prior to the granting of fishing rights in waters of the public domain.

If a pisciculture activity requires the withdrawal of water from the public domain, it shall be subject to obtaining a use authorization or concession under the terms of this Decree-Law.

ARTICLE 24
(Of navigation and transport)

Navigation and transport in the watercourses and lakes of the public domain are regulated by the legislative and regulatory provisions in force in this matter.

Notwithstanding, an opinion shall be requested from the Ministry responsible for water, prior to the establishment of any regular transport service in the watercourses or lakes of the public domain.

ARTICLE 25
(Of other uses)

The Ministry responsible for water shall take, by dispatch, having heard other interested Departments, any measure necessary to control the other uses of waters such as hydroelectric production, medicinal, and others.

CHAPTER VI
SUBTERRANEAN WATERS

ARTICLE 26
(Of research, abstraction, and exploitation)

Any work of research, abstraction, or exploitation of subterranean waters that spring forth or not, is subject to the regime of authorization or concession according to the applicable norms of Chapter II of this Decree-Law. The technical and administrative conditions of research, abstraction, and exploitation shall be determined by regulation.

Authorizations for abstraction shall be granted, taking into account the rights of third parties previously legalized. If there is an effect on the rights of third parties, the holder of the new authorization shall be responsible, and must indemnify for the real damages caused.

At the request of the water authority, the users of the same aquifer shall constitute a community of users.

The Ministry responsible for water may restrict the application of the provisions of this article in certain perimeters or zones, based on reasons of general interest, and to ensure the protection of the waters.

ARTICLE 27
(Of the protection perimeter)

Around each borehole, well, or work intended for the supply of drinking water to cities or agglomerations, a protection perimeter is instituted, the limits of which shall be fixed, in each case, by the Ministry responsible for water.

Within the protection perimeters, it is prohibited, among others:

a) To build housing or buildings of any type;
b) To install industrial or commercial establishments, slaughterhouses, cattle corrals;
c) To introduce animals, deposit or bury garbage or filth of any type;
d) To install graves or make excavations;
e) To install pipelines and reservoirs for hydrocarbons or used waters of any type;
f) To establish crop lands and spread manure, fertilizers, or any other product intended for the fertilization of soils or the protection of soils or the protection of cultures.

The acts fixing the limits of the protection perimeters may prohibit supplementary activities not enumerated in this article. The same acts may impose the establishment of an immediate protection zone within the protection perimeter, the lands of which must be acquired in full ownership and be fenced by the responsible organism. In cases where the imposed prohibitions lead to the non-use of previously exploited lands, the rights holder may demand their expropriation.

CHAPTER VII
HARMFUL EFFECTS OF WATERS

ARTICLE 28
(Of the protection of soils)

Without prejudice to other legal provisions in force, namely in forestry matters and the fight against erosion, whoever wishes to undertake works or carry out equipment on lands susceptible to disturbing the existence or flow of springs, lakes, or watercourses must request prior authorization from the Ministry responsible for water. Before making a decision, the Ministry responsible for water shall consult the Ministries responsible for agriculture and forests and for territorial planning.

ARTICLE 29
(Of sanitation)

The sanitation of population centers has as objectives: to ensure the rapid and non-stagnant evacuation of used domestic and industrial waters, susceptible to having harmful effects, and of fluvial waters susceptible to submerging inhabited places, in conditions compatible with the demands of public health and the safeguarding of the environment.

In population centers equipped with a sewage network, the connection to the collective network of dwellings or any establishments rejecting water is obligatory.

In areas of dispersed habitat or in centers that do not have a collective sewage network, the evacuation of used waters shall normally be done by means of individual evacuation installations jointly approved by the Ministries responsible for water and public health. Individual sanitation systems shall be abandoned as a collective system is created.

The connection to the public sanitation network of waters that are not of domestic origin is subject to the prior authorization of the managing service of the public sanitation network.

The prior treatment of used residual waters before their evacuation is obligatory in cases where in their raw state they may affect the proper functioning of the public sanitation network and the purification installations.

ARTICLE 30
(Of flooding)

The defense against flooding is an obligation of every person, physical or collective, public or private, including corporations.

The Ministry responsible for water shall study the plans and execute all pertinent actions, if necessary in cooperation with other competent or interested State departments, to facilitate the evacuation of flood waters or for the adoption of preventive or urgent measures.

ARTICLE 31
(Of floods)

The studies, plans, or actions for the fight against floods are coordinated by the Ministry responsible for water, which in cooperation with other interested departments of the State, shall adopt the regulatory measures intended for the execution of these actions.

ARTICLE 32
(Of other problems related to water)

Other problems related to water, such as droughts, hydraulic erosion, sedimentation, salinization of waters, and others, shall be the object of regulation by the Ministry responsible for water, adopted in coordination with other interested departments of the State.

CHAPTER VIII
QUALITATIVE PROTECTION OF WATERS

ARTICLE 33
(Prevention and control of pollution)

It is not lawful for anyone to pollute or contaminate the waters they do not consume, with the expenses and works to restore the healthiness of the waters being at the cost of the infringer who, in addition to criminal liability, if any, shall be responsible for losses and damages and for administrative fines.

The pollution of surface or subterranean waters through the direct or indirect effects of the rejection, introduction, or disposal of solid or liquid residues in the water masses and in the aquifers is also prohibited.

The administration shall require the study of the environmental impact on the waters, for the approval of certain projects that may affect their quality.

Joint dispatches from the Ministry responsible for water and that of public health shall fix the quantitative and qualitative limits from which the operations of rejection of residual waters or waste, or other substances into the public water domain, shall be subject to prior authorization from the Ministry responsible for water. The same regulatory diplomas shall define the conditions for the granting, modification, suspension, or revocation of the authorizations.

The administration may establish water reserve zones, relating to surface waters or aquifers, with limitation of water exploitation, total or partial, limitations of certain activities, for reasons of an ecological character or for activities provided for in the Water Master Plan.

ARTICLE 34
(Of the control of water quality)

The regulatory requirements to be defined by the Ministries responsible for water and public health shall establish the following:

a) The modalities for carrying out the controls of the works and installations of production, collection, storage, transport, and distribution of waters;
b) The bacteriological, physical, and chemical parameters of drinking water and the modalities for carrying out sanitary controls or analyses, as well as the methods and products used for the treatment and correction of waters;
c) The special protection measures that must be adopted in exceptional situations;
d) The sanitary controls of the personnel working in the drinking water distribution sector;
e) Any other provision that may be necessary to ensure the qualitative protection of the waters.

CHAPTER IX
HYDRAULIC WORKS

ARTICLE 35
(Of hydraulic works)

The realization of any work of a hydraulic nature or of any work in the water domain of the State shall require an administrative authorization.

Hydraulic works of general interest must be integrated into the Water Master Plan.

The beneficiaries of the hydraulic works carried out by the State shall pay a fee to compensate for the costs of construction, use, and maintenance.

CHAPTER X
OF THE ECONOMIC-FINANCIAL REGIME OF THE USE OF THE PUBLIC WATER DOMAIN

ARTICLE 36
(Of the fees for the use of waters)

The occupation or use that requires authorization or concession of the assets of the public water domain referred to in Article 2, as well as the authorized discharges of residual water in accordance with Article 33 of this Decree-Law, may be charged with a fee intended for the protection and improvement of the public water domain.

CHAPTER XI
INFRACTIONS AND SANCTIONS

ARTICLE 37
(Of infractions)

The following are considered as infractions, under the terms of this Decree-Law, especially:

a) The actions that cause prejudice to the assets of the State's water domain;
b) The derivation or abstraction of surface or subterranean waters without authorization for the abstraction of waters;
c) The execution of works and labors in the water domain of the State, or in the regulated use zones, without administrative authorization;
d) The deposition or rejection of solid or liquid materials that may deteriorate the quality of surface or subterranean waters, without due authorization;
e) The contravention of the prohibitions or omission of the obligations established by this Decree-Law, or by the titles of concession or authorization for the use of waters.

ARTICLE 38
(Of sanctions)

The amount of the fines imposed and of the indemnities shall be fixed according to the damages caused and the situation of the infringer.

The fines and indemnities shall be fixed by the Water Authority and by the Council of Ministers respectively.

CHAPTER XII
GENERAL PROVISIONS OF EXERCISED RIGHTS

ARTICLE 39
(Of the recognition of the exercised right)

Under the terms of this Decree-Law, the previously exercised rights are recognized if the said rights have not been interrupted for more than 3 years. The requirement of continuity and interruption is maintained if the rights have been interrupted for reasons of force majeure.

It is incumbent upon the holder of the right to claim its recognition by means of a declaration made within the period of 1 year from the date of entry into force of this Decree-Law. The said declaration shall provide all the necessary information for the verification of the right that the Ministry responsible for water may require. Any claim of rights presented after the period of 1 year shall be considered a request for authorization of use or for a concession of exploitation and shall be subject to the legal regime defined within the scope of Chapter II of this Decree-Law.

The Ministry responsible for water shall proceed to the verification of the rights on the basis of the elements provided by the applicant and the elements it has requested to be collected. The recognized rights shall be the object of registration within the scope of the regulatory norms of the water cadastre. However, the Ministry responsible for water may always restrict the recognized rights, under the terms of the provisions, of a general nature, of Articles 9 and 12 of this Decree-Law.

ARTICLE 40
(Of the institutional coordination of the National Water Council)

Without prejudice to its own competencies, the Ministry responsible for water shall cooperate according to the needs with the other departments of the State interested in the management of waters, namely the Ministries responsible for Agriculture, Planning, Public Health, Industry and Energy, Foreign Affairs and Public Works, Construction and Urbanism, and Feminine Promotion.

A decree shall establish a National Water Council, an interministerial coordination body functioning under the Ministry responsible for water, charged with pronouncing on the different aspects of the general policy of water management of the country and ensuring its compliance. The decree creating the National Water Council shall determine the norms relative to its composition, competencies, and functioning.

ARTICLE 41
(Of the associations of water interest)

Associations of water interest for the use, management, and fight against the harmful effects of waters at the local or regional level may be formed either voluntarily or obligatorily.

A dispatch from the Ministry responsible for water in collaboration with other interested Ministries shall determine the norms relative to the formation, competencies, recognition, and functioning of the associations of water interest.

ARTICLE 42
(Of the regulatory provisions)

On the initiative of the Ministry responsible for water or on the joint initiative with other Ministries interested in the sector, regulations may be adopted, with a view to the total or partial execution of the objectives and provisions of this Decree-Law.

The regulations shall establish the following:

a) Procedure for the recognition of the rights of use exercised;
b) Procedure for making declarations of use, requesting authorization and concession of use, and priority zones for the application of these procedures;
c) The authorities empowered to inspect, establish, and take actions against infractions of the provisions of this Decree-Law or other diplomas or regulations of application;
d) Any other action that may be necessary to ensure the compliance with the objectives of this Law.

ARTICLE 43
(Repealed legislation)

All legislation contrary to the provisions of this Decree-Law is revoked.

ARTICLE 44
(Publication and entry into force)

This Decree-Law enters into force immediately.
Approved on 2 March 1992.
Promulgated on 16 September 1992.
Let it be published.
The President of the Council of State, General João Bernardo Vieira.