Legislative Decree of April 3, 2006, no. 152
Provisions on environmental matters
(Official Gazette no. 88 of 14/04/2006 - Ordinary Supplement no. 96)
Text updated, most recently, by Law Decree no. 300 of December 28, 2006 - the so-called "Milleproroghe Decree" (Official Gazette no. 300 of 28/12/2006), as amended during its conversion into Law no. 17/2007 (Official Gazette no. 47 of 26.2.2007, Ordinary Supplement no. 48) and by the 2007 Finance Act (Law no. 296/2006, published in Official Gazette no. 299 of 27.12.2006 - Ordinary Supplement no. 244)
Note: Pursuant to Art. 1, para. 5 of Legislative Decree 284/2006 (Official Gazette no. 274 of 24/11/2006), "...All references to the Supervisory Authority for water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree no. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed."
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
Having regard to Articles 76, 87, and 117 of the Constitution;
Having regard to Law no. 308 of December 15, 2004, delegating to the Government the reorganization, coordination, and integration of environmental legislation and measures for direct application;
Having regard to Art. 14 of Law no. 400 of August 23, 1988, on the discipline of Government activity and the organization of the Presidency of the Council of Ministers;
Having regard to Legislative Decree no. 112 of March 31, 1998, on the conferral of administrative functions and tasks of the State to the regions and local authorities, in implementation of Chapter I of Law no. 59 of March 15, 1997;
Having regard to Directives 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June 27, 2001, on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment, and 85/337/EEC of the Council of June 27, 1985, as amended by Directives 97/11/EC of the Council of March 3, 1997, and 2003/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May 26, 2003, on the assessment of the environmental impact of certain public and private projects, as well as the reorganization and coordination of procedures for environmental impact assessment (EIA), for strategic environmental assessment (SEA), and for integrated pollution prevention and control (IPPC);
Having regard to Council Directive 96/61/EC of September 24, 1996, on integrated pollution prevention and control;
Having regard to Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October 23, 2000, establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy;
Having regard to Council Directive 91/156/EEC of March 18, 1991, amending Directive 75/442/EEC on waste;
Having regard to Council Directive 91/689/EEC of December 12, 1991, on hazardous waste;
Having regard to Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December 20, 1994, on packaging and packaging waste;
Having regard to Council Directive 84/360/EEC of June 28, 1984, on the combating of air pollution from industrial plants;
Having regard to Directive 94/63/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of December 20, 1994, on the control of volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions resulting from the storage of petrol and its distribution from terminals to service stations;
Having regard to Council Directive 1999/13/EC of March 11, 1999, on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain activities and installations;
Having regard to Council Directive 1999/32/EC of April 26, 1999, relating to a reduction in the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels and amending Directive 93/12/EEC;
Having regard to Directive 2001/80/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of October 23, 2001, on the limitation of emissions of certain pollutants into the air from large combustion plants;
Having regard to Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of April 21, 2004, on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage, which, for this purpose, "establishes a framework for environmental liability" based on the "polluter pays" principle;
Having regard to the preliminary resolution of the Council of Ministers, adopted at the meeting of November 18, 2005;
Having acquired the opinion of the Unified Conference referred to in Article 8 of Legislative Decree no. 281 of August 28, 1997;
Having acquired the opinions of the competent Committees of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate of the Republic;
Having regard to the preliminary resolution of the Council of Ministers, adopted at the meeting of January 19, 2006;
Having acquired the opinions of the competent Committees of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate of the Republic;
Having regard to the resolutions of the Council of Ministers, adopted at the meetings of February 10 and March 29, 2006;
On the proposal of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers for Community Policies, for Public Function, for Regional Affairs, of the Interior, of Justice, of Defence, of Economy and Finance, of Productive Activities, of Health, of Infrastructure and Transport, and of Agricultural and Forestry Policies;
Hereby issues
the following legislative decree:
PART I - COMMON PROVISIONS
Art. 1
Scope of application
This legislative decree governs, in implementation of Law no. 308 of December 15, 2004, the following matters:
a) in part two, the procedures for the strategic environmental assessment (SEA), for the environmental impact assessment (EIA), and for the integrated environmental permit (IPPC);
b) in part three, soil protection and the fight against desertification, the protection of waters from pollution, and the management of water resources;
c) in part four, waste management and the remediation of contaminated sites;
d) in part five, air protection and the reduction of atmospheric emissions;
e) in part six, liability for environmental damage.
Art. 2
Objectives
The primary objective of this legislative decree is to promote levels of human quality of life, to be achieved through the safeguarding and improvement of environmental conditions and the prudent and rational use of natural resources.
For the purposes referred to in paragraph 1, this decree provides for the reorganization, coordination, and integration of legislative provisions in the matters referred to in Article 1, in accordance with the principles and guiding criteria set out in paragraphs 8 and 9 of Art. 1 of Law no. 308 of December 15, 2004, and in compliance with the Community legal order and the powers of the regions and local authorities.
The provisions of this decree shall be implemented within the limits of the human, instrumental, and financial resources available under current legislation and without new or increased burdens on public finances.
Art. 3
Criteria for the adoption of subsequent measures
The provisions of this decree may not be derogated from, amended, or repealed except by express declaration, through the amendment or repeal of the individual provisions contained herein.
Within two years from the date of publication of this legislative decree, with one or more regulations to be issued pursuant to Art. 17, paragraph 2, of Law no. 400 of August 23, 1988, the Government, on the proposal of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, shall adopt the necessary measures to amend and integrate the implementing and executive regulations on environmental matters, in compliance with the objectives, principles, and provisions of this decree.
For the purpose of preparing the measures referred to in paragraph 2, the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall avail itself of the opinion of the qualified representatives of the economic and social interests present in the Economic and Social Council for Environmental Policies (CESPA), without new or increased burdens on public finances.
Within the same period as referred to in paragraph 2, the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall provide for the amendment and integration of the technical standards on environmental matters with one or more regulations to be issued pursuant to Article 17, paragraph 3, of Law no. 400 of August 23, 1988, in compliance with the objectives, principles, and provisions of this decree. The application of Art. 13 of Law no. 11 of February 4, 2005, remains unaffected, concerning the transposition of Community directives that amend the implementing methods and technical characteristics of directives already transposed into the national legal order.
For the purposes of the fulfilments referred to in this article, the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall avail itself, for a duration of two years and without new or increased burdens on public finances, of a group of ten experts appointed by its own decree, from among university professors, senior managers of public research institutes, and highly qualified experts in the sectors and matters covered by this decree. The members of the expert group are not entitled to any compensation, indemnity, emoluments of any kind, or reimbursement of expenses.
PART II - PROCEDURES FOR STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT (SEA), FOR ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (EIA), AND FOR THE INTEGRATED ENVIRONMENTAL PERMIT (IPPC)
TITLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 4
Content and objectives
The provisions of part two of this decree constitute the implementation of:
a) Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of June 27, 2001, on the assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment, with the following objectives:
to ensure a high level of environmental protection;
to contribute to the integration of environmental considerations into the preparation, adoption, and approval phases of certain plans and programmes in order to promote sustainable development;
to promote the use of environmental assessment in the drafting of state, regional, and supra-municipal plans and programmes;
to ensure that an environmental assessment is carried out for plans and programmes that are likely to have significant effects on the environment;
b) Directive 85/337/EEC of the Council of June 27, 1985, on the assessment of the environmental impact of certain public and private projects, as amended and integrated by Council Directive 97/11/EC of March 3, 1997, and by Directive 2003/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of May 26, 2003, and of Directive 96/61/EC of September 24, 1996, transposed by Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, on integrated pollution prevention and control, with the following objectives:
to ensure the full transposition of Community directives on environmental impact assessment;
to simplify, without prejudice to the provisions of Art. 1, paragraph 2, of Law no. 443 of December 21, 2001, also through the issuance of regulations pursuant to Art. 17, paragraph 2, of Law no. 400 of August 23, 1988, the environmental impact assessment procedures, which shall take into account the cost-benefit ratio of the project from an environmental, economic, and social point of view;
to advance the environmental impact assessment procedures to the earliest configuration of the project that can be subjected to an exhaustive examination;
to introduce a system of controls capable of ascertaining effective compliance with the requirements imposed during the assessment;
to encourage public participation in the elaboration of plans and programmes on environmental matters;
to ensure the completion of procedures within certain timeframes;
to introduce coordination mechanisms between the environmental impact assessment procedure and the strategic environmental assessment procedure;
to adopt coordination measures between the environmental impact assessment procedures and those for integrated pollution prevention and control, or for the integrated environmental permit, in the case of plants subject to both procedures, in order to avoid duplication and overlaps.
Strategic environmental assessment, or simply environmental assessment, concerns plans and programmes for intervention on the territory and is aimed at ensuring that the environmental effects arising from the implementation of said plans and programmes are taken into consideration during their elaboration and before their approval.
The procedure for strategic environmental assessment constitutes, for the plans and programmes subject to such assessment, an integral part of the ordinary procedure for adoption and approval. Approval measures adopted without prior strategic environmental assessment, where required, are null and void.
Environmental impact assessment concerns projects for works and interventions which, due to their nature or size, may have a significant impact on the environment and is aimed at ensuring that the effects deriving from the construction and operation of said works and interventions on the ecosystem are taken into consideration during their planning and before the approval or authorization of the related projects, or in any case before their implementation.
The procedure for environmental impact assessment constitutes, for the projects of works and interventions subject to it, a prerequisite or an integral part of the ordinary authorization or approval procedure. Authorization or approval measures adopted without prior environmental impact assessment, where required, are null and void.
Art. 5
Definitions
For the purposes of part two of this decree, the following definitions shall apply:
a) strategic environmental assessment procedure - SEA: the preparation of a report concerning the environmental impact resulting from the implementation of a specific plan or programme to be adopted or approved, the carrying out of consultations, the assessment of the environmental report and the results of the consultations in the decision-making process for the approval of a plan or programme, and the making available of information on the decision;
b) environmental impact assessment procedure - EIA: the preparation of a study concerning the environmental impact that may derive from the construction and operation of a work whose project is subject to approval or authorization, the carrying out of consultations, the assessment of the environmental study and the results of the consultations in the decision-making process for the approval or authorization of the project for the work, and the making available of information on the decision;
c) environmental impact: the qualitative and/or quantitative alteration of the environment, understood as a system of relationships between anthropic, physical, chemical, naturalistic, climatic, landscape, architectural, cultural, and economic factors, as a consequence of the implementation on the territory of plans or programmes or the realization of projects relating to particular plants, works, or public or private interventions, as well as the commissioning of the related activities;
d) plans and programmes: all acts and measures of planning and programming, however named, provided for by legislative, regulatory, or administrative provisions adopted or approved by state, regional, or local authorities, including those co-financed by the European Community, as well as their modifications; unless the applicable sector regulations provide otherwise, the strategic environmental assessment is carried out, before approval, on the adopted plans and programmes or, where a formal act of adoption is not provided for, on the proposals for plans or programmes that have reached a sufficient degree of elaboration for their presentation for approval;
e) project for a work or intervention: the preliminary, final, or executive technical design concerning the realization of a plant, work, or intervention, including interventions on the natural environment or landscape such as those intended for the exploitation of natural resources and soil; unless the applicable sector regulations expressly provide otherwise, the environmental impact assessment is carried out on the preliminary projects that contain the exact indication of the areas involved and the performance characteristics of the works to be realized, in addition to any further elements deemed useful for carrying out the environmental impact assessment;
f) substantial modification of a plan, programme, or project: the modification of an approved plan, programme, or project which, in the opinion of the competent authority, is likely to have significant effects on the environment;
g) substantial modification of a work or intervention: the intervention on an existing work from which a work with substantially different characteristics from the previous one derives; for the works or interventions for which dimensional thresholds are set in Annex III to part two of this decree, an intervention of expansion, enhancement, or extension also constitutes a substantial modification if said intervention, in itself, is equal to or greater than thirty percent of these thresholds;
h) proponent or developer: the entity or public authority responsible for the adoption of a plan or programme or, in general, that requests its approval, as well as the entity or public authority that takes the initiative for a public project and the subject who requests the authorization for a private project;
i) environmental report: the technical-scientific study containing the identification, description, and assessment of the significant effects that the implementation of a specific plan or programme could have on the environment, as well as the reasonable alternatives that can be adopted in consideration of the objectives and the territorial scope of the plan or programme;
l) environmental impact study: the technical-scientific study containing a description of the project with information on its location, design, and size, the identification, description, and assessment of the significant effects that the realization of the project would have on the environment, as well as a comparison with the reasonable alternatives that can be adopted in consideration of the objectives, interests, and services related to the planned work or intervention and the territorial area concerned;
m) environmental compatibility judgment: the act with which the competent body concludes the strategic environmental assessment or environmental impact assessment procedure;
n) authorization: the decision of the competent authority that enables the developer or proponent to realize the project;
o) competent authority: the administration responsible, under current legislation, for the adoption of a final measure of the procedure or of one of its phases;
p) consultation: the set of forms of participation, including direct participation, of other administrations and the public concerned in the collection and assessment of data and information that constitute the necessary knowledge base to express the judgment of environmental compatibility of a specific plan or programme or of a specific project;
q) public: one or more natural or legal persons and, in accordance with national legislation or practice, their associations, organizations, or groups;
r) public concerned: the public affected or likely to be affected by, or having an interest in, the environmental decision-making procedures; for the purposes of this definition, non-governmental organizations promoting environmental protection and meeting any requirements under national law, as well as the qualified representatives of economic and social interests present in the Economic and Social Council for Environmental Policies (CESPA), shall be deemed to have such an interest;
s) interested parties: any person who, taking into account the socio-economic and territorial characteristics of the plan or programme subject to strategic impact assessment or the project subject to environmental impact assessment, intends to provide cognitive and evaluative elements concerning the possible effects of the intervention itself;
t) screening procedure: the preliminary procedure, which precedes the presentation of the plan or programme proposal, or the presentation of the project, initiated for the purpose of defining whether a specific plan or programme must be subject to strategic environmental assessment, or whether a specific project must be subject to the environmental impact assessment procedure;
u) scoping phase: the procedure that precedes the presentation of the project, initiated for the purpose of defining, in consultation between the competent authority and the proponent, the information that must be provided in the environmental impact study.
Art. 6
Technical-advisory committee for environmental assessments
By decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, the Technical-Advisory Committee for Environmental Assessments is established at the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory. The same decree establishes the duration and the methods for the organization and functioning of the Committee itself.
The Committee provides the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory with technical-scientific support for the implementation of the provisions of part two of this decree. In particular, the Committee provides for the preliminary investigation and expresses opinions on the environmental reports and environmental impact studies relating to plans and programmes or projects respectively subject to strategic environmental assessment and environmental impact assessment of state competence, and also expresses opinions on integrated environmental permits of state competence.
The Committee is composed of seventy-eight members, in addition to the president and three vice-presidents, chosen from among university professors, professionals, and experts qualified in management systems, in measurements, and in design, geological, environmental, legal, economic, and social matters, as well as from among managers of the public administration.
The activity of the Committee is structured in three operational sectors headed by the three vice-presidents and concerning, respectively, the following procedures:
a) strategic environmental assessment;
b) environmental impact assessment;
c) integrated pollution prevention and control.
The Committee normally operates through subcommittees. The subcommittees are composed of a variable number of members depending on the professional skills necessary for the complete and adequate examination of the specific case. The identification of the necessary professional skills is the responsibility of the competent vice-president. Once the professional profiles of the members and the coordinator of the subcommittee have been identified, the individual commissioners are assigned to the subcommittees on the basis of a predefined rotation order.
Due to the specific regional interests involved in the exercise of an activity subject to the provisions of part two of this decree, the relevant subcommittee is supplemented by the expert designated by each of the regions directly affected by the activity by territory.
For the purposes of paragraph 6, the regional administrations directly affected by territory shall notify the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory of their interest.
If the administrations referred to in paragraph 7 have not provided for the designation of the experts, the subcommittee is constituted in its ordinary composition and proceeds in any case with the investigation entrusted to it, without prejudice to the possibility of its subsequent integration, in compliance with the stage of elaboration and any partial conclusions already reached.

TITLE II - STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT - SEA
CHAPTER I - COMMON PROVISIONS ON SEA
Art. 7
Scope of application
The plans and programmes referred to in paragraph 2, as well as those referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, if they are likely to have significant effects on the environment and cultural heritage, are subject to strategic environmental assessment. The modifications referred to in paragraph 5 are also subject to strategic environmental assessment.
Without prejudice to the provision of paragraph 3, the following are subject to strategic environmental assessment:
a) plans and programmes that meet both of the following requirements:
they concern the agricultural, forestry, fisheries, energy, industrial, transport, waste and water management, telecommunications, tourism, land-use planning or land use sectors;
they set the framework for the approval, authorization, location, or realization of works and interventions whose projects are subject to environmental impact assessment under current legislation;
b) plans and programmes concerning sites designated as special protection areas for the conservation of wild birds and those classified as sites of Community importance for the protection of natural habitats and wild flora and fauna.
Plans and programmes other than those referred to in paragraph 2, which set the framework for the approval, authorization, location, or realization of works and interventions whose projects, although not subject to environmental impact assessment under these provisions, may nevertheless have significant effects on the environment and cultural heritage, in the opinion of the competent subcommittee for strategic environmental assessment, are also subject to strategic environmental assessment.
The plans and programmes referred to in paragraph 2 that determine the use of small areas at a local level and the modifications of the plans and programmes referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 that have already been approved are subject to strategic environmental assessment only if they are likely to have significant effects on the environment.
For the purposes of applying paragraphs 3 and 4, the authority competent for the approval of the plan or programme must preliminarily verify whether the specific plan or programme subject to approval is likely to have significant effects on the environment according to the criteria set out in Annex II to part two of this decree. An analogous verification must be carried out when approving a modification of an already approved plan or programme.
In the examination of individual cases and in the specification of the types of plans and programmes referred to in paragraph 2, other authorities which, due to their specific environmental competences, may be interested in the environmental effects resulting from the application of the plan or programme under examination must be consulted. For plans and programmes whose approval is the responsibility of State bodies, the opinion of the committee referred to in Article 6 must in any case be obtained.
The conclusions adopted pursuant to paragraphs 5 and 6, including the reasons for not carrying out the strategic environmental assessment, must be made available to the public.
The following are in any case excluded from the scope of application of the provisions of part two of this decree:
a) plans and programmes intended exclusively for national defence purposes characterized by extreme urgency or covered by state secrecy;
b) financial or budget plans and programmes;
c) plans and programmes relating to mobile telephony interventions subject to the provisions of Art. 87 of Legislative Decree no. 259 of August 1, 2003.
Art. 8
Integration of environmental assessment in planning procedures
The strategic environmental assessment must be carried out during the preparatory phase of the plan or programme and prior to its approval in a legislative or administrative capacity.
The administrative procedures provided for in this title are integrated into the ordinary procedures in force for the adoption and approval of plans and programmes.
In the case of hierarchically ordered plans and programmes, the authorities competent for the approval of the individual plans or programmes shall take into account, in order to avoid duplication of judgment, the assessments already carried out for the approval of the higher-level plan and those to be carried out for the approval of the subordinate plans.
Art. 9
Environmental report
For plans and programmes subject to strategic environmental assessment, an environmental report must be drawn up, before and for the purposes of approval, which constitutes an integral part of the documentation of the proposed or adopted plan or programme to be approved.
The environmental report must identify, describe, and evaluate the significant effects that the implementation of the proposed plan or programme could have on the environment and cultural heritage, as well as the reasonable alternatives that can be adopted in consideration of the objectives and the territorial scope of the plan or programme itself. Annex I to part two of this decree lists the information to be provided for this purpose to the extent that it can be reasonably required, taking into account the level of knowledge and current assessment methods, the contents and level of detail of the plan or programme and, in cases of multi-level planning processes, taking into account that certain aspects are more adequately assessed in other subsequent phases of said process.
To prepare the environmental report, the information referred to in Annex I to part two of this decree concerning the environmental effects of the plan and programme under assessment may be used, which is in any case available and has also been obtained within the framework of other decision-making levels or otherwise acquired in implementation of other regulatory provisions.
The proponent has the option of initiating a preliminary phase for the purpose of defining, in consultation with the competent authority, the information to be provided in the environmental report.
Other authorities which, due to their specific environmental competences, may be interested in the environmental effects of the application of the plan or programme under examination must be consulted at the time of the decision on the scope of the information to be included in the environmental report and on its level of detail.
A non-technical summary of the contents of the proposed plan or programme and of the other data and information contained in the report itself must be attached to the environmental report.
Art. 10
Consultations
Before approval, the adopted plan or programme, or, if a formal act of adoption is not provided for, the proposal of the plan or programme and the environmental report prepared in accordance with Article 9 must be made available to the other authorities which, due to their specific environmental or landscape competences, exercise administrative functions related to the environmental effects of the application of the plan or programme, and to the public.
For the purposes of paragraph 1 and paragraph 4, the proposal of the plan or programme and the related environmental report must be sent to all the aforementioned other authorities. The non-technical summary, indicating the locations where the full documentation can be inspected, must be deposited in an adequate number of copies at the offices of the provinces and regions whose territory is even partially affected by the plan or programme or by the effects of its implementation.
The sending and deposit referred to in paragraph 2 must be announced in the press in the manner established by a specific regulation, which ensures uniform publicity criteria for all plans and programmes subject to strategic environmental assessment, guaranteeing that the public concerned is in all cases adequately informed. The same regulation establishes the cases and methods for the simultaneous total or partial publication on the internet of the proposal of the plan or programme and the related environmental report. The regulation must be issued by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory within ninety days from the date of entry into force of part two of this decree. Until the entry into force of the regulation, publications must be carried out at the care and expense of the interested party in a national newspaper and in a regional newspaper for each directly interested region.
Within a period of forty-five days from the publication of the notice of deposit and any publication on the internet pursuant to paragraph 3, anyone with an interest may inspect the proposal of the plan or programme and the related environmental report deposited and publicized in accordance with paragraphs 1, 2, and 3. Within the same period, anyone may submit their own observations, including by providing new or further cognitive and evaluative elements.
The deposits and publications, referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, with the connected and consequent consultations, referred to in paragraph 4, replace for all purposes all forms of information and participation possibly provided for by the ordinary procedures for the adoption and approval of the same plans or programmes.
Art. 11
Transboundary consultations
Where the implementation of a specific plan or programme subject to strategic environmental assessment is likely to have significant effects on the environment of another Member State of the European Union, or where the Member State that is likely to be significantly affected so requests, a full copy of the proposal of the plan or programme and the environmental report, prepared in accordance with Article 9, must be transmitted, before the approval of the plan or programme, also to said interested Member State, inviting it to express its opinion within a period of sixty days from the receipt of the transmitted documentation.
Where the Member State, to which a copy of the proposal of the plan or programme and the environmental report has been transmitted pursuant to paragraph 1, communicates within thirty days of receipt that, in order to express its opinion, it intends to proceed with consultations, the competent authority must grant a suitable period, in any case not exceeding ninety days, to allow the Member State to proceed with consultations with its own internal authorities and the public concerned. In the meantime, any other deadline is suspended.
Art. 12
Environmental compatibility judgment and approval of the proposed plan or programme
Before the approval of the plan or programme subject to strategic environmental assessment, the environmental report prepared pursuant to Article 9, the opinions expressed pursuant to Article 10, as well as any opinions of other Member States rendered pursuant to Article 11, must be examined and evaluated.
Based on the results of the examination and evaluations referred to in paragraph 1, the authority responsible for the environmental assessment, within sixty days from the expiry of the last deadline for the submission of opinions under Articles 10 and 11, shall issue the environmental compatibility judgment containing a detailed and reasoned environmental opinion which constitutes a prerequisite for the continuation of the procedure for the approval of the plan or programme. The environmental compatibility judgment may be conditional on the adoption of specific modifications and integrations to the proposal of the evaluated plan or programme. In such cases, the judgment is transmitted to the proponent with an invitation to make the necessary changes before resubmitting the plan or programme for approval. The expiration of the term referred to in this paragraph without action implies the exercise of substitutive power by the Council of Ministers, which shall act within sixty days, after formal notice to the competent body to comply within a period of twenty days, also at the request of the interested parties.
In the absence thereof, for plans and programmes subject to environmental assessment at the state level, a negative judgment on the environmental compatibility of the presented plan or programme is deemed to have been issued. For plans and programmes subject to environmental assessment at a non-state level, the provisions of the preceding period apply until the entry into force of specific regional and autonomous province regulations, to be adopted in compliance with the relevant Community discipline in force.
The approval of the plan or programme shall take into account the opinion referred to in paragraph 2. To this end, the approval measure must be accompanied by a summary statement illustrating how environmental considerations have been integrated into the plan or programme and how the environmental report prepared pursuant to Article 9, the opinions expressed pursuant to Article 10, and the results of the consultations initiated pursuant to Article 11 have been taken into account, as well as the reasons for which the adopted plan or programme was chosen, also with respect to the possible alternatives that had been identified, and, finally, the measures adopted regarding monitoring.
If, during the investigation for the approval of a plan or programme to be subjected to strategic environmental assessment pursuant to Article 7, it is found that the relevant procedure has not been initiated, the authority competent for the approval of said plan or programme shall formally invite the proponent to initiate said procedure and simultaneously suspend the approval procedure.
Art. 13
Information about the decision
The environmental compatibility judgments and the approval measures referred to, respectively, in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 12 must be made available to the public, together with the related documentation, by the proponent, who is required to give notice thereof in the press according to the methods established by the regulation referred to in Article 10, paragraph 3.
The same environmental compatibility judgments and approval measures are transmitted in full copy by the competent authority to the other authorities and to the Member States that have participated in the consultations referred to in Articles 10 and 11.
Art. 14
Monitoring
The authorities responsible for the approval of plans or programmes shall, using the system of Environmental Agencies, monitor the significant environmental effects of the implementation of the approved plans and programmes, in order, among other things, to identify at an early stage unforeseen negative effects and to be able to adopt appropriate corrective measures.
To comply with the provision of paragraph 1, existing control mechanisms must be used, as far as possible, in order to avoid duplication of monitoring.
The corrective measures adopted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be notified to the public by means of the press according to the methods established by the regulation referred to in Article 10, paragraph 3.
CHAPTER II - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR SEA AT THE STATE LEVEL
Art. 15
Plans and programmes subject to SEA at the state level
Plans and programmes referred to in Article 7 whose approval is the responsibility of State bodies are subject to strategic environmental assessment at the state level.
For the environmental assessment of the plans and programmes referred to in paragraph 1, the provisions of this chapter supplement and specify the provisions of Chapter I; the latter also apply to the assessment of the projects referred to in paragraph 1 where not otherwise provided for in this Chapter II.
Art. 16
Initiation of the procedure
For the plans and programmes referred to in Article 15, before the initiation of the approval procedure, the adopted or otherwise proposed plan or programme must be submitted, accompanied by the environmental report and the non-technical summary, to the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, to the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities, to the Technical-Advisory Committee for Environmental Assessments referred to in Article 6, and to any other interested Ministries.
For the plans and programmes referred to in Article 15, before the initiation of the approval procedure, pursuant to Article 10, paragraphs 1 and 2, an adequate number of copies of the non-technical summary must be deposited at the offices of the provinces and regions whose territory is even partially affected by the plan or programme or by the effects of its implementation; a full copy of the proposal of the plan or programme and the environmental report must also be sent to the regions.
Notice of the deposits and submissions must be published in the manner provided for in Article 10, paragraph 3.
In the phases referred to in Articles 19 and 20, if carried out, and in any case at the start of the investigation, due to the specific characteristics of the proposed plan or programme and also at the request of the proponent, specific and different methods of publication and information may be established, as appropriate, supplementing or simplifying those referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3. If such modifications are ordered during the investigation and involve the renewal of the press notice referred to in paragraph 3, all deadlines of the procedure are interrupted and restart from the publication of the new announcement.
Art. 17
Investigation and adoption of the environmental compatibility judgment
The technical-investigative activities for the strategic environmental assessment of plans and programmes whose approval is the responsibility of State bodies are carried out by the Committee referred to in Article 6. To this end, the competent vice-president, for each proposal of a plan or programme sent to him pursuant to Article 16, paragraph 1, provides for the establishment of a specific subcommittee according to the criteria of Article 6, paragraph 5; where the conditions are met, the subcommittee is supplemented pursuant to paragraph 6 of the same Article 6.
If the subcommittee verifies the incompleteness of the submitted documentation, it may request its integration. In this case, the deadlines of the procedure remain suspended until the receipt of the requested integrations.
The appointed subcommittee acquires and evaluates all the submitted documentation, as well as the observations, objections, and suggestions forwarded pursuant to Articles 10 and 11, and expresses its reasoned opinion within a period of thirty days from the expiry of all the deadlines referred to in Articles 10 and 11, without prejudice to any suspension ordered pursuant to paragraph 2.
In case of delay, and after formal notice to act within ten days, also at the request of the interested parties, all the powers of the vice-presidents are exercised by the President of the Committee.
The opinion expressed by the subcommittee is immediately transmitted by the competent vice-president to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, who, in concert with the Minister for Cultural Heritage and Activities and with the proposing Minister, within the following thirty days, provides for the adoption of the environmental compatibility judgment.
The expiration of the term referred to in paragraph 5 without action implies the exercise of substitutive power by the Council of Ministers, pursuant to and with the effects of Article 12, paragraph 2.
Art. 18
Effects of the environmental compatibility judgment
The proposals of plans and programmes subject to strategic environmental assessment, even if they have already been adopted with a formal act, are reviewed and, if necessary, reformulated, on the basis of the environmental compatibility judgment rendered pursuant to Article 17.
For the purposes of the provisions of Article 4, paragraph 3, the environmental compatibility judgment is in any case attached to the plan or programme submitted for approval.
For the purposes of the approval of the plan or programme, Article 12, paragraph 3, applies.
Art. 19
Screening procedure
Plans and programmes other than those referred to in Article 7, paragraph 2, but which nevertheless concern the agricultural, forestry, fisheries, energy, industrial, transport, waste and water management, telecommunications, tourism, land-use planning or land use sectors, as well as modifications to said plans and programmes, are subject to a screening procedure in order to ascertain whether the conditions of paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of the same Article 7 are met.
The screening is carried out by the authority competent for the approval of the plans or programmes, at the request of the proponent and having acquired the opinion of the Committee referred to in Article 6, which shall decide, based on the criteria of Annex II to part two of this decree, within thirty days of the request. To this end, the screening request, together with the proposal of the plan or programme and its related attached documents, must be forwarded in copy to said Committee to allow the timely establishment of the subcommittee responsible for expressing the opinion. In case of a positive outcome, the investigation referred to in Article 17 is also assigned to the appointed subcommittee; moreover, taking into account the specific characteristics of the proposed plan or programme, the information methods may be simultaneously specified, also in derogation of the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.
If, during the investigation for the approval of a new plan or programme, or of a modification to an already approved plan or programme, it is found that the screening procedure referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has not been carried out, such procedure is initiated by the authority competent for the approval, which, to this end, transmits to the Committee referred to in Article 6 all the useful documentation in its possession and simultaneously suspends the approval procedure.
Art. 20
Scoping phase
For plans and programmes subject to strategic environmental assessment at the state level, the scoping phase referred to in Article 9, paragraph 4, takes place in consultation between the proponent and the Committee referred to in Article 6.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, the interested proponent has the option to directly request the competent vice-president to establish, according to the criteria of Article 6, paragraphs 5 and 6, a specific subcommittee with which to interact.
At the end of the scoping phase, the appointed subcommittee, having heard the territorially interested regions pursuant to and for the effects of Article 9, paragraph 5, drafts a report indicating precisely all the information that must be included in the environmental report and its relative level of detail. With the same report, taking into account the specific characteristics of the proposed plan or programme, the information methods may be specified, also in derogation of paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 16.
The subcommittee appointed for the scoping phase is also responsible for the investigation referred to in Article 17.
CHAPTER III - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR SEA AT THE REGIONAL OR PROVINCIAL LEVEL
Art. 21
Plans and programmes subject to SEA at the regional or provincial level
Plans and programmes referred to in Article 7 whose approval is the responsibility of the regions or local authorities are subject to strategic environmental assessment at the regional or provincial level.
Art. 22
SEA procedures at the regional or provincial level
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall regulate with their own laws and regulations the procedures for the strategic environmental assessment of the plans and programmes referred to in Article 21.
Until the entry into force of the regional and provincial regulations referred to in paragraph 1, the provisions of part two of this decree shall apply
TITLE III - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT - EIA
CHAPTER I - COMMON PROVISIONS ON EIA
Art. 23
Scope of application
The following are subject to the environmental impact assessment procedure:
a) projects listed in list A of Annex III to part two of this decree, wherever located;
b) projects listed in list B of Annex III to part two of this decree that fall, even partially, within protected natural areas as defined by Law no. 394 of December 6, 1991;
c) projects listed in list B of Annex III to part two of this decree that do not fall within protected natural areas, but which, based on the elements indicated in Annex IV to part two of this decree, in the opinion of the competent authority, nevertheless require the environmental impact assessment procedure to be carried out;
d) projects for specific works or interventions for which the environmental impact assessment procedure is expressly required by special sector-specific laws governing said works or interventions.
For projects of works or interventions referred to in paragraph 1, letter a), located within protected natural areas, the dimensional thresholds, where provided, are reduced by fifty percent.
The same procedure also applies to interventions on existing works not falling within the categories of paragraph 1, if such interventions result in a work that falls into those same categories. It also applies to substantial modifications of works and interventions falling within the categories of paragraph 1, letters a) and b).
The following projects may be excluded from the scope of application of this title which, in the opinion of the competent authority, do not require the environmental impact assessment procedure to be carried out:
a) projects related to works and interventions intended exclusively for national defence purposes;
b) projects related to works and interventions intended exclusively for civil protection purposes, or ordered in situations of necessity and urgency for the purpose of safeguarding human life from imminent danger or in response to disasters;
c) projects related to works of a temporary nature, including those exclusively necessary for the execution of authorized remediation interventions.
For the projects referred to in paragraph 1, letter c), and paragraph 4, letters a), b), and c), the screening procedure referred to in Article 32 applies. During this screening procedure, for the projects referred to in paragraph 4, the competent authority shall communicate to the European Commission, before granting any exemption, the reasons justifying such an exemption pursuant to Art. 2, paragraph 3, letter c), of Directive 85/337/EEC.
For the purposes of the application of Art. 4 of Legislative Decree no. 13 of January 17, 2005, for airport projects subject to the environmental impact assessment procedure pursuant to part two of this decree, such procedure shall take into account the requirements defined in ANNEX 2 of the same Legislative Decree no. 13 of January 17, 2005.
In the case of works and interventions of extreme urgency intended exclusively for national defence as per paragraph 4, letter a), the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall, on the proposal of the Minister of Defence, grant an exemption from any environmental compatibility verification only for projects related to works covered by state secrecy.
Art. 24
Objectives of the EIA
The environmental impact assessment procedure must ensure that:
a) in the decision-making processes concerning the realization of projects identified in the Annexes to part two of this decree, the objectives of protecting health and improving the quality of human life are considered, in order to contribute with a better environment to the quality of life, provide for the maintenance of species diversity and preserve the reproductive capacity of the ecosystem as an essential life resource, as well as the objectives of ensuring the multiple use of natural resources, of public goods intended for collective enjoyment, and of ensuring sustainable development;
b) for each project, the direct and indirect effects of its realization on humans, fauna, flora, soil, surface and groundwater, air, climate, landscape, and the interaction between these factors, on material assets, and on cultural and environmental heritage are evaluated;
c) for each project, the main reasons for the choice among the alternatives proposed by the developer are made explicit;
d) at every stage of the procedure, the exchange of information and consultation between the proponent and the competent authority are guaranteed;
e) public information and participation in the procedure are guaranteed;
f) the simplification, rationalization, and coordination of assessments and authorizations in environmental matters are achieved.
Art. 25
Jurisdiction and procedures
The environmental impact assessment is the responsibility of:
a) for projects of works and interventions subject to state authorization and for those with interregional or international environmental impact, the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Cultural Heritage and Activities, according to the provisions of this Chapter I and Chapter II;
b) in other cases, the authority identified by the region or autonomous province by its own law, taking into account the attributions of competence for the issuance of the authorization for the realization of the various works and interventions and according to the procedures established by the same, on the basis of the guiding criteria of Chapter III of this title, without prejudice to the common provisions of this Chapter I.
Art. 26
Initiation of the procedure
The developer or proponent of the work or intervention must submit a specific application to the competent authority, enclosing the project, the environmental impact study, and the non-technical summary.
A full copy of the application referred to in paragraph 1 and its annexes must be transmitted to the interested regions, provinces, and municipalities and, in the case of protected natural areas, also to their respective managing bodies, which must express their opinion within sixty days of receiving the application. After this period has elapsed, the competent authority shall issue the environmental compatibility judgment even in the absence of said opinions.
Due to the specific dimensional and functional characteristics of the planned work or intervention, or due to the number of potentially interested local authorities and the size of the project's documentation and related environmental impact study, the developer or proponent, by initiating a specific preliminary phase for this purpose, may request to be fully or partially exempted from the obligations under paragraph 2, or to be authorized to adopt other appropriate disclosure systems.
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 29, paragraph 5, in case of acceptance of opinions, observations, or findings, any integrations to the submitted study or to the attached documentation may be requested, with an indication of a reasonable deadline for the response, or submitted by the developer or proponent, on a single occasion. In such cases, all deadlines of the procedure are interrupted and restart from the date of receipt of the supplementary documentation. If the interested party does not comply, the assessment shall not proceed further. The developer or proponent has the option to submit a new application.
Art. 27
Environmental impact study
The environmental impact study is prepared at the care and expense of the developer or proponent, according to the indications in Annex V to part two of this decree.
For projects subject to environmental impact assessment, the developer or proponent has the option, before initiating the environmental impact assessment procedure, to request the competent authority to carry out a preliminary phase for the purpose of defining, in consultation with said authority, the information, including that in Annex V to part two of this decree, that must be contained in the environmental impact study. To this end, the developer or proponent submits a report which, based on the identification of the expected environmental impacts, defines the work plan for the preparation of the environmental impact study, the methodologies it intends to adopt for the elaboration of the information contained therein, and its relative level of detail. The competent authority, even if said opinion has been rendered, may request the developer or proponent, after the initiation of the environmental impact assessment procedure, for clarifications and integrations regarding the submitted documentation.
Other authorities which, due to their specific environmental competences, may be interested in the environmental effects of the realization and operation of the planned work or intervention must be consulted, at the time of the decision, on the scope of the information to be included in the environmental impact study and on its level of detail.
The requested information must be consistent with the necessary level of detail and strictly relevant to the specific characteristics of a certain type of project and the components of the environment likely to be affected, also in relation to the location of the intervention, taking into account available knowledge and assessment methods. If the developer or proponent believes that certain information should not be disclosed for reasons of business or personal confidentiality, protection of intellectual property, public security, or national defence, they may produce, along with the complete version, a version of the environmental impact study devoid of said information. The competent authority, having assessed the reasons for confidentiality provided by the proponent, may order that the consultation of the environmental impact study by the public concerned be limited to this version.
The environmental impact study must in any case contain at least the following information:
a) a description of the project with information on its characteristics, location, and dimensions;
b) a description of the measures planned to avoid, reduce, and possibly offset significant negative effects;
c) the data necessary to identify and assess the main effects on the environment and cultural heritage that the project may produce, both in the construction and operational phases;
d) a summary description of the main alternatives examined by the developer, including the so-called "zero option," with an indication of the main reasons for the choice, from the perspective of environmental impact;
e) an assessment of the cost-benefit ratio of the project from an environmental, economic, and social point of view.
A non-technical summary of the dimensional and functional characteristics of the planned work or intervention and of the data and information contained in the study itself must be attached to the environmental impact study.
For the purposes of preparing the study, the public or private entity interested in the realization of the works or plants has the right to access the information and data available at the offices of public administrations.
Art. 28
Publicity measures
The administrations of the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall ensure the identification of the offices where, on a permanent or case-by-case basis, the documents and acts relating to the assessment procedures, pending or concluded, concerning works and interventions relevant to their respective powers and competences, are deposited and can be consulted by the public.
Simultaneously with the submission of the application referred to in Article 26, the developer or proponent shall, at their own expense:
a) deposit the project of the work, the environmental impact study, and an adequate number of copies of the non-technical summary at the offices identified, pursuant to paragraph 1, by the State administrations, the regions, and the interested autonomous provinces;
b) disseminate a press announcement of the deposit, according to the methods established by the competent authority with a specific regulation that ensures uniform publicity criteria for all projects subject to environmental impact assessment, guaranteeing that the public concerned is in all cases adequately informed. The same regulation establishes the cases and methods for the simultaneous total or partial publication of the project on the internet. The regulation must be issued by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory within ninety days from the date of entry into force of part two of this decree. Until the entry into force of the regulation, publications shall be carried out at the care and expense of the interested party in a national newspaper and in a regional newspaper for each directly interested region.
Appeals against the decisions, acts, or omissions subject to the provisions on public participation established by Title III of part two of this decree are always admissible according to the general rules on challenging illegal administrative acts.
Art. 29
Participation in the procedure
The interested party who intends to provide cognitive and evaluative elements concerning the possible effects of the planned work or intervention may submit written observations on said project, subject to the environmental impact assessment procedure, to the competent authority within a period of forty-five days from the publication referred to in Article 28, paragraph 2, letter b). The environmental compatibility judgment shall consider, simultaneously, individually or in groups, such observations, the opinions provided by public administrations, and any other observations from the public.
The competent authority for the environmental impact assessment may order a public inquiry to examine the study presented by the developer or proponent, the opinions provided by public administrations, and the observations of the public.
The inquiry referred to in paragraph 2 suspends the deadline referred to in Article 31, paragraph 1, and concludes within the sixtieth day from the one on which it was initiated, regardless of the stage reached by the planned operations. Within the same period, the competent authority shall draft a report on the work carried out and a judgment on the results that have emerged, which are acquired and evaluated for the purposes of the judgment referred to in Article 31.
The developer or proponent, if the inquiry referred to in paragraph 2 does not take place, may, also at their own request, be summoned by the competent authority, before the conclusion of the procedure, for a summary adversarial hearing with the parties who have submitted opinions or observations. The record of the adversarial hearing is acquired and evaluated for the purposes of the judgment referred to in Article 31.
When the developer or proponent intends to conform, in whole or in part, the project to the opinions or observations, or to the findings that emerged during the public inquiry or the adversarial hearing, they shall make a request to the competent authority, indicating the necessary time. The request suspends all deadlines of the procedure, which resume their course with the deposit of the modified project.
Art. 30
Technical investigation
The technical investigation of the projects referred to in Article 23 has the following objectives:
a) to ascertain the completeness of the submitted documentation;
b) to verify the correspondence of the description of the places and their environmental characteristics with those documented by the proponent;
c) to verify that the project data, concerning the production and management of liquid and solid waste, polluting emissions into the atmosphere, noise, and any other potential source of pollution, correspond to the requirements dictated by the sector regulations;
d) to ascertain the coherence of the project, concerning the construction techniques and the planned production processes, with the data on the use of raw materials and natural resources;
e) to ascertain the correct use of analysis and forecasting tools, as well as the suitability of the detection and forecasting techniques employed by the proponent in relation to the environmental effects;
f) to identify and describe the overall impact of the project's realization on the environment and cultural heritage, also in relation to the final quality levels, comparing the existing situation at the time of the communication with the forecast of the subsequent one.

Art. 31
Environmental compatibility judgment
The environmental impact assessment procedure must conclude with a reasoned judgment within ninety days from the publication referred to in Article 28, paragraph 2, letter b), except in cases of interruption and suspension expressly provided for.
The expiration of the term referred to in paragraph 1 without action, calculated taking into account any interruptions and suspensions that have occurred, implies the exercise of substitutive power by the Council of Ministers, which shall act within sixty days, after formal notice to the competent body to comply within a period of twenty days, also at the request of the interested parties. In the absence thereof, for projects subject to environmental impact assessment at the state level, a negative judgment on the environmental compatibility of the project is deemed to have been issued. For projects subject to environmental impact assessment at a non-state level, the provisions of the preceding period apply until the entry into force of specific regional and autonomous province regulations, to be adopted in compliance with the relevant Community discipline in force.
The administration competent for the final authorization for the realization of the work or the planned intervention shall acquire the environmental compatibility judgment, including any requirements for the mitigation of impacts, the monitoring of the works and plants, and the measures planned to avoid, reduce, or possibly offset significant negative effects. In the case of initiatives promoted by public authorities, the final measure authorizing their realization must adequately demonstrate the conformity of the choices made with the outcomes of the environmental impact procedure. In other cases, the projects must be adapted to the outcomes of the environmental compatibility judgment before the issuance of the authorization for realization.
The outcomes of the environmental impact assessment procedure must be communicated to the parties to the procedure, to all competent public administrations, including in matters of environmental controls, and must be adequately publicized. In particular, the information made available to the public includes: the content of the decision and any conditions attached to it; the main reasons and considerations on which the decision is based, taking into account the requests and opinions of the public, as well as information on the public participation process; a description, where necessary, of the main measures prescribed in order to avoid, reduce, and if possible, offset the most significant negative effects.
Art. 32
Screening procedure
For the projects referred to in Article 23, paragraph 1, letter c), and paragraph 4, letters a), b), and c), the developer or proponent shall first request the screening provided for therein from the competent authority. The information that the developer or proponent must provide for said screening concerns a description of the project and the data necessary to identify and assess the main effects that the project may have on the environment.
If the competent authority deems that the project must be subject to environmental impact assessment, Articles 26 and following shall apply.
The competent authority must rule within sixty days from the date of the application, identifying any requirements for the mitigation of impacts and for the monitoring of the works or plants; the remedies provided for by current legislation are available against administrative silence. The Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall ensure that the list of projects for which screening has been requested and their respective outcomes are made public.
Art. 33
Relations between SEA and EIA
For projects of works and interventions to be carried out in implementation of plans or programmes that have already been subject to strategic environmental assessment, and which fall within the categories for which environmental impact assessment is required, all elements positively evaluated during the strategic assessment or in any case decided during the approval of the plan or programme shall constitute acquired data during the execution of the latter assessment.
Art. 34
Relations between EIA and IPPC
For works and interventions subject to environmental impact assessment and simultaneously falling within the scope of application of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, as well as for substantial modifications, according to the definition in Article 5, paragraph 1, letter g), of such works or interventions, the proponent has the option to obtain that the environmental impact assessment procedure be integrated into the procedure for the issuance of the integrated environmental permit.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, where the proponent expresses the will to avail itself of said option:
a) the project and the environmental impact study, to be submitted pursuant to part two of this decree, shall also include the information referred to in Article 5, paragraphs 1 and 2, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, with the necessary level of detail;
b) the deposits of acts and documents, the publications, and the consultations provided for by part two of this decree shall replace for all purposes all forms of information and participation provided for in the aforementioned Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005;
c) pending the environmental impact assessment procedure, the procedure for the issuance of the integrated environmental permit, if already initiated, remains suspended;
d) the investigation of the environmental impact study is conducted by the bodies responsible for the investigation of the application for the integrated environmental permit, and the related opinion on environmental impact assessment is supplemented with regard to the aspects connected with integrated pollution prevention and control, in accordance with Community principles and the dictates of the relevant implementing rules;
e) once the environmental impact assessment procedure is concluded, the environmental compatibility judgment is also communicated to the authority competent for the issuance of the integrated environmental permit, which resumes the relevant procedure with the transmission of the aforementioned judgment to the administrations referred to in Art. 5, paragraphs 10 and 11, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, for the expression of their competent opinion; with the preceding phases being absorbed into the procedure already carried out, the conference of services referred to in Article 5, paragraph 10, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, is held within the following thirty days, simultaneously with the final phase of the conference of services referred to in Art. 1, paragraph 2, of Decree-Law no. 7 of February 7, 2002, converted, with amendments, by Law no. 55 of April 9, 2002;
f) the authority competent for the issuance of the integrated environmental permit shall rule taking into account the environmental compatibility judgment issued on the project of the work or intervention for which said permit has been requested;
g) is required to pay a single fee in the amount established by the decree referred to in Article 49, paragraph 2.
Modifications to plants subject to the discipline laid down by Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, which constitute a mere implementation of requirements contained in the integrated environmental permit, are not considered substantial modifications for the purposes of part two of this decree.
The modifications planned for plants subject to the discipline laid down by Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, which pursuant to Art. 10 of said legislative decree are not found to be substantial, do not constitute substantial modifications for the purposes of the provisions of part two of this decree.
For thermal power plants with a capacity exceeding 300 MW, as well as for substantial modifications to them, according to the definition in Article 5, paragraph 1, letter g), the environmental impact assessment procedure is integrated into the procedure for the issuance of the integrated environmental permit. Paragraph 2 of this article applies, with the exception of the provision in letter c).
Modifications to electricity production plants and related connected works, which are also subject to the discipline of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, and which constitute mere implementations of requirements contained in the integrated environmental permit and in the authorization referred to in Art. 1, paragraph 1, of Decree-Law no. 7 of February 7, 2002, converted, with amendments, by Law no. 55 of April 9, 2002, are not considered substantial modifications for the purposes of part two of this decree and are to be included in the relevant authorization measures.
CHAPTER II - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR EIA AT THE STATE LEVEL
Art. 35
Projects subject to EIA at the state level
The environmental impact assessment of projects for works and interventions falling into the categories of Article 23 is the responsibility of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Cultural Heritage and Activities, having consulted the interested region and based on the investigation carried out by the Technical-Advisory Committee referred to in Article 6, in cases where it concerns:
a) works or interventions subject to authorization for construction or operation by State bodies;
b) works or interventions located in the territory of more than one region or which may in any case have significant impacts on more than one region;
c) works or interventions that may have significant effects on the environment of another Member State of the European Union.
For the environmental impact assessment of the projects referred to in paragraph 1, the provisions of this Chapter II supplement and specify the provisions of Chapter I; the latter also apply to the assessment of the projects referred to in paragraph 1 where not otherwise provided for in this Chapter II.
Art. 36
Assessment procedure
Pursuant to and for the purposes of Article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, the projects for the works and interventions referred to in Article 35 must be submitted to the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, to the Ministry for Cultural Heritage and Activities, to the territorially interested region, to the Technical-Advisory Committee for Environmental Assessments referred to in Article 6, and to any other interested Ministries. The environmental impact study referred to in Article 27 and its related non-technical summary must be attached to the project. If the planned work or intervention affects more than one region, a copy of the project, to which the environmental impact study referred to in Article 27 and its related non-technical summary are attached, must be sent to each region.
For works and interventions that fall within the territory of multiple local authorities, only the extract of the project and the environmental impact study relating to the portion of the work or intervention that affects the relevant territorial area may be deposited with each province and each municipality, without prejudice to the deposit of the non-technical summary in its full version. The same possibility is permitted with regard to protected natural areas and their respective managing bodies.
The option for the developer or proponent to request in advance from the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory the definition, pursuant to Article 26, paragraph 3, of more adequate and practicable disclosure methods in relation to the specific characteristics of the project remains unaffected. With the same methods, at the express request of the developer or proponent, the communications and deposits to be made for the reopening before the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory of the procedure originally initiated at the regional or provincial level, and for which the authority designated by the region or autonomous province has declared itself incompetent pursuant to Article 42, paragraph 3, can be defined.
The interested regions, provinces, and municipalities must express their opinion within sixty days from the date of the transmission referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. After this period has elapsed, the compatibility judgment may be issued even in the absence of said opinions.
Without prejudice to the provisions of the regulation referred to in Article 28, paragraph 2, letter b), the announcement of the submission must in any case be published, at the care of the developer or proponent, at least in a national newspaper and in a regional newspaper for each territorially interested region.
Anyone with an interest, pursuant to the laws in force, may submit to the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, or directly to the Technical-Advisory Committee referred to in Article 6, and to the interested region, written petitions, observations, or opinions on the work subject to environmental impact assessment, within a period of thirty days from the publication of the project's communication.
The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, based on the investigation carried out pursuant to Article 37, shall rule on the environmental compatibility, in concert with the Minister for Cultural Heritage and Activities and with the proposing Minister, within ninety days from the date of the last of the publications referred to in paragraph 5, and in any case not before sixty days have elapsed from the last of the transmissions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, subject to extension decided by the Council of Ministers in cases of particular importance.
The expiration of the terms referred to in paragraph 7 without action, calculated taking into account any interruptions and suspensions that have occurred, implies the exercise of substitutive power by the Council of Ministers, which shall act pursuant to and with the effects of Article 31, paragraph 2.
For the works referred to in paragraph 1, letter a), of Article 35, the Minister competent for their realization, if he does not deem it appropriate to conform the proposed project to the compatibility judgment of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, may propose with justification to the President of the Council of Ministers the adoption of a measure to review said judgment, or order the non-realization of the project. The Council of Ministers shall decide on the review proposal within the terms and with the effects referred to in paragraph 8 of this article.

Art. 37
Investigative tasks of the technical-advisory committee
The technical-investigative activities for the environmental assessment of projects for works and interventions of State competence are carried out by the Committee referred to in Article 6. To this end, the competent vice-president, for each project sent to him pursuant to Article 26, paragraph 1, provides for the establishment of a specific subcommittee according to the criteria of Article 6, paragraph 5; where the conditions are met, the subcommittee is supplemented pursuant to paragraph 6 of the same Article 6. This paragraph does not apply to the plants governed by paragraphs 8, 9, 10, and 11.
If the subcommittee verifies the incompleteness of the submitted documentation, it may request its integration. In this case, the time limits of the procedure remain suspended until the receipt of the requested integrations. If the interested party fails to provide the requested integrations within the following thirty days, or within the different period specified in the integration request itself in consideration of the possible difficulty in producing certain information, the procedure is archived. The developer or proponent in any case has the option to submit a new application.
The appointed subcommittee acquires and evaluates all the submitted documentation, as well as the observations, objections, and suggestions forwarded pursuant to Articles 36, paragraphs 4 and 6, and 39, and expresses its reasoned opinion within a period of thirty days from the expiry of all the deadlines referred to in the aforementioned Articles 36, paragraphs 4 and 6, and 39, without prejudice to any suspension ordered pursuant to paragraph 2.
The opinion issued by the subcommittee is transmitted, within ten days of its recording, by the competent vice-president to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, for the adoption of the environmental compatibility judgment pursuant to paragraph 7 of Article 36.
In cases where, based on the prescribed approval procedures, the environmental impact assessment is carried out on preliminary projects, the subcommittee also has the task of verifying the compliance of the final project with the requirements of the environmental compatibility judgment and of carrying out the appropriate checks in this regard.
If, during the verifications referred to in paragraph 5, it is ascertained that the final project differs from the preliminary one with regard to the areas concerned or the environmental resources involved, or in any case that it is significantly different from it, the subcommittee shall transmit a specific report to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, who shall adopt the measures relating to the updating of the environmental impact study and order its new publication, also for the purpose of sending observations by the interested public and private parties.
For the purpose of carrying out the tasks referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6, the proponent is required, under penalty of forfeiture of the authorization for the realization of the project or the enabling title for the transformation of the territory, to transmit the final project to the competent subcommittee before the start of the work's realization.
Art. 38
Scoping phase and screening
For the projects referred to in Article 35, the technical-advisory Committee referred to in Article 6 also provides for the investigation for the scoping and possible screening phases, referred to, respectively, in Articles 26, paragraph 3, 27, paragraph 2, 32, and 36, paragraph 3.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, the relevant requests are addressed directly to the vice-president of the Committee competent for the matter, who provides for the establishment, according to the criteria of Article 6, paragraphs 5 and 6, of the subcommittees to which the relevant investigations are assigned.
The subcommittee established for the scoping phase related to a specific project then also provides for the investigation referred to in Article 37 related to the same project. The same applies to the subcommittee established for the screening in case of a positive outcome of said preliminary procedure.
Art. 39
Procedures for projects with transboundary environmental impacts
If the planned work or intervention is likely to have significant effects on the environment of another Member State of the European Union, or if the Member State that could be significantly involved so requests, at least the following must be transmitted to the same State:
a) a description of the project accompanied by all available information about its possible transboundary impact;
b) information on the nature of the decision that may be taken.
If the Member State, to which the information referred to in paragraph 1 has been sent, communicates within the following thirty days that it intends to participate in the ongoing assessment procedure, a copy of the developer's or proponent's application, the project of the work or intervention, the environmental impact study, and the non-technical summary must be transmitted to the same State, if this has not already been done.
With the transmission of the documentation referred to in paragraph 2, a period of thirty days is assigned to the interested State to submit any observations, unless said State has adopted the decision to express its opinion after consultation with its own competent authorities and the public concerned, in which case a suitable period, in any case not exceeding ninety days, is assigned.
More detailed arrangements for the implementation of this article may be agreed upon on a case-by-case basis with the interested Member State, without prejudice to the provision of adequate conditions for public participation in the decision-making procedures.
Pending the deadlines referred to in paragraph 3, any other deadline of the procedure remains suspended.
Art. 40
Effects of the environmental compatibility judgment
The outcomes of the environmental impact assessment procedure must be communicated to the parties to the procedure, to all competent public administrations, including in matters of environmental controls, and must be adequately publicized. In particular, the information made available to the public includes: the content of the decision and any conditions attached to it; the main reasons and considerations on which the decision is based, taking into account the requests and opinions of the public, as well as information on the public participation process; a description, where necessary, of the main measures prescribed in order to avoid, reduce, and if possible, offset the most significant negative effects.
The environmental compatibility judgment, including any requirements for the mitigation of impacts and the monitoring of the works and plants, must, in particular, be acquired by the authority competent for issuing the final authorization for the realization of the planned work or intervention.
In the case of initiatives promoted by public authorities, the final measure authorizing their realization must adequately demonstrate the conformity of the choices made with the outcomes of the environmental impact procedure. In other cases, the projects must be adapted to the outcomes of the environmental compatibility judgment before the issuance of the authorization for realization.
In the case of works not realized at least for twenty percent within three years from the environmental compatibility judgment, the procedure must be reopened to assess whether the information regarding the territory and the state of the resources has undergone significant changes in the meantime. In any case, the environmental compatibility judgment ceases to be effective upon the completion of the fifth year from its issuance.
Art. 41
Subsequent checks
If, during the execution of the works referred to in Article 35, the Committee referred to in Article 6 identifies situations that conflict with the judgment expressed on the environmental compatibility of the project, or behaviors that conflict with the requirements related to it or are otherwise such as to compromise fundamental needs of ecological and environmental balance, it shall promptly communicate this to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, who, having carried out the appropriate verifications, shall order the suspension of the works and issue the necessary prescriptions for the restoration of the environmental compatibility conditions of the works themselves.
CHAPTER III - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR EIA AT THE REGIONAL OR PROVINCIAL LEVEL
Art. 42
Projects subject to EIA at the regional or provincial level
Projects for works and interventions falling within the categories of Article 23 are subject to environmental impact assessment at the regional or provincial level, unless they are works or interventions subject to state authorization or having interregional or international environmental impact pursuant to Article 35.
The regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano may define, for certain project types and/or predetermined areas, based on the elements indicated in Annex IV to part two of this decree, an increase in the thresholds of list B of Annex III to part two of this decree up to the measure of twenty percent.
If, from the investigation carried out at the regional or provincial level, it emerges that the planned work or intervention may have significant impacts also on the territory of other regions or autonomous provinces or of other Member States of the European Union, the competent authority, with its own reasoned measure, declares itself incompetent and forwards the documents to the Technical-Advisory Committee referred to in Article 6 for their possible use in the procedure reopened at the state level. In this case, the developer or proponent has the option to request, pursuant to Article 36, paragraph 3, the preliminary definition of the methods for the partial or total renewal of the procedure's opening phase.
If it is ascertained that the final project differs from the preliminary one with regard to the areas concerned or the environmental resources involved, or in any case that it is significantly different from it, the competent authority shall adopt the measures relating to the updating of the environmental impact study and order its new publication, also for the purpose of sending observations by the interested public and private parties.
Art. 43
EIA procedures at the regional or provincial level
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 4, 5, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, and 34, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall regulate with their own laws and regulations the procedures for the environmental impact assessment of the projects referred to in Article 42, paragraph 1.
Until the entry into force of the regional and provincial regulations referred to in paragraph 1, the provisions of part two of this decree shall apply.
In regulating the contents and the procedure of environmental impact assessment, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall in any case ensure that the following are identified:
a) the competent authority in matters of environmental impact assessment;
b) the competent technical body for carrying out the investigation;
c) any delegations to local authorities for particular project types;
d) any additional or derogatory methods with respect to those indicated in part two of this decree for public information and consultation;
e) the methods for creating or adapting cartographies, territorial information support tools, and an archive of environmental impact studies that can be consulted by the public;
f) the supplementary criteria with which the provinces and municipalities affected by the project are defined.
The regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano may identify appropriate forms of publicity, in addition to those provided for in the regulation referred to in Article 28, paragraph 2, letter b).
If, during the execution of the works referred to in Article 42, situations are identified that conflict with the judgment expressed on the environmental compatibility of the project, or behaviors that conflict with the requirements related to it or are otherwise such as to compromise fundamental needs of ecological and environmental balance, the competent authority, having carried out the appropriate verifications, shall order the suspension of the works and issue the necessary prescriptions for the restoration of the environmental compatibility conditions of the works themselves.

Art. 44
Procedure deadlines
Without prejudice to cases of suspension and interruption, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano may establish, in cases of particular importance, the extendibility of the deadlines for the conclusion of the procedure up to a maximum of sixty days.
Art. 45
Coordination and integration of administrative procedures
The regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall define the methods for the harmonization, coordination, and, if possible, integration of the environmental impact assessment procedure with the ordinary procedures for consent to the realization of the works.
The regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall integrate and specify, in relation to their respective legislative and regulatory provisions, the provisions of Articles 33 and 34.
Art. 46
Simplified procedures and exemptions
For small-scale or limited-duration projects carried out by artisans or small businesses, as well as for screening requests under Article 32, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall promote simplified methods.
For the projects referred to in Article 23, paragraph 1, letter c), the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano may determine, for specific project categories or in particular environmental and territorial situations, based on the elements of Annex IV to part two of this decree, criteria or conditions for exclusion from the procedure.
Art. 47
Information obligations
The regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall inform, every twelve months, the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory about the measures adopted, the environmental impact assessment procedures in progress, and the state of definition of the cartographies and information tools.
TITLE IV - TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Art. 48
Repeals
Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 3, from the date of entry into force of part two of this decree, the following are repealed:
a) Art. 6 of Law no. 349 of July 8, 1986;
b) Art. 18, paragraph 5, of Law no. 67 of March 11, 1988;
c) the decree of the President of the Republic of April 12, 1996, published in the Official Gazette no. 210 of September 7, 1996;
d) Art. 27 of Law no. 136 of April 30, 1999;
e) the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of September 3, 1999, published in the Official Gazette no. 302 of December 27, 1999;
f) the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of September 1, 2000, published in the Official Gazette no. 238 of October 11, 2000;
g) Art. 6 of Law no. 93 of March 23, 2001;
h) Art. 19, paragraphs 2 and 3, of Legislative Decree no. 190 of August 20, 2002;
i) Art. 77, paragraphs 1 and 2, of Law no. 289 of December 27, 2002;
l) Articles 1 and 2 of Decree-Law no. 315 of November 14, 2003, converted, with amendments, by Law no. 5 of January 16, 2004;
m) Art. 5, paragraph 9, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005;
n) Art. 30 of Law no. 62 of April 18, 2005.
The Technical-Advisory Committee for Environmental Assessments referred to in Article 6 shall, through its own subcommittees constituted according to the methods of paragraph 5 of the cited Article 6, carry out the activities already under the competence of the committees referred to in Art. 18, paragraph 5, of Law no. 67 of March 11, 1988, in Art. 19, paragraph 2, of Legislative Decree no. 190 of August 20, 2002, and in Art. 5, paragraph 9, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005. Any reference to such committees contained in the cited Law no. 67 of March 11, 1988, and in the cited Legislative Decrees of August 20, 2002, no. 190, and February 18, 2005, no. 59, shall be understood as referring to the subcommittees of Article 6, paragraph 5, established from time to time.
Until the entry into force of the decree determining the tariffs provided for in Article 49, paragraph 2, the application of paragraph 1, letters b), d), g), h), i), l), and m), of this article remains suspended, and therefore the committees referred to in Article 18, paragraph 5, of Law no. 67 of March 11, 1988, in Article 19, paragraph 2, of Legislative Decree no. 190 of August 20, 2002, and in Article 5, paragraph 9, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, shall continue to perform their own competent functions.
Art. 49
Implementation measures for the establishment and functioning of the technical-advisory committee for environmental assessments
The decree referred to in Article 6, paragraph 1, is adopted within ninety days from the date of publication of this decree in the Official Gazette of the Italian Republic. In the first application of this decree, the members of the technical-advisory committees referred to in Art. 18, paragraph 5, of Law no. 67 of March 11, 1988, in Art. 19, paragraphs 2 and 3, of Legislative Decree no. 190 of August 20, 2002, and in Art. 5, paragraph 9, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, shall remain in office, in continuity with the activities carried out in their committees of origin, assuming the functions of members of the committee referred to in Article 6 until the expiry of the fourth year from the entry into force of part two of this decree; this committee is supplemented in the cases and with the methods provided for in Article 6, paragraphs 6, 7, and 8.
Within the same period of ninety days, by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities and the Minister of Economy and Finance, in agreement with the Permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, the accounting and fee methods to be applied in relation to the investigations and checks provided for by part two of this decree are regulated, including the screenings under Articles 7, paragraph 5, and 19, paragraphs 1 and 2, the scoping phase, and that of conducting integrated procedures pursuant to Article 34, paragraph 1, as well as the fees due to the members of the Committee referred to in Article 6. The charges for the investigation and for the checks are quantified in relation to the size and complexity of the project, its economic value, the number and type of environmental components involved, taking into account the eventual presence of registered or certified management systems and the operating expenses of the Committee. These charges, borne by the developer or proponent, are used exclusively for the aforementioned expenses. To this end, for plants of state competence, the amounts of the fees are paid into the State budget to be reallocated within sixty days to the budget estimate of the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory.
Within the following fifteen days, each region and autonomous province shall communicate to the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory its own list of experts referred to in Article 6, paragraph 6, with the rotation order according to which, when necessary, they must be summoned to a subcommittee.
The operation of the Committee referred to in Article 6 is subject to the entry into force of the decree determining the tariffs provided for in paragraph 2.
The expenditure authorizations already provided for pursuant to Art. 18, paragraph 5, of Law no. 67 of March 11, 1988, and of Art. 6 of Law no. 93 of March 23, 2001, are in any case confirmed.
In order to guarantee the operation of the committee referred to in Art. 5, paragraph 9, of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, pending the adoption of the decree referred to in Art. 18, paragraph 2 of the cited Legislative Decree no. 59/2005, and until the entry into force of the decree determining the tariffs referred to in paragraph 2 of this article, for the operating expenses as well as for the payment of the fees due to the members of the aforementioned committee appointed by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory on January 4, 2006, the payment to the State budget of a flat-rate sum of twenty-five thousand euros for each request for an integrated environmental permit for plants of state competence is charged to the applicant; the aforementioned sum is reallocated within sixty days, by decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance, to a specific chapter of the budget estimate of the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory. The sums referred to in this paragraph are understood to be paid as an advance, without prejudice to the applicant's obligation to pay a balance in relation to any difference resulting from what is established by the subsequent decree determining the tariffs, set for the full coverage of the actual cost of the service rendered.
Art. 50
Adaptation of regional and provincial provisions
The regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano shall ensure that the legislative and regulatory provisions enacted to adapt their respective legal systems to part two of this decree enter into force within one hundred and twenty days from the publication of this decree. In the absence of the aforementioned provisions, the rules of part two of this decree and its Annexes shall apply.
Art. 51
Regulations and supplementary technical standards - single environmental authorization for small businesses
In order to simplify the strategic environmental assessment and environmental impact assessment procedures, with specific regulations, issued pursuant to Art. 17, paragraph 2, of Law no. 400 of August 23, 1988, specific rules may be adopted for a better integration of said assessments into the specific current administrative procedures for the approval or authorization of the plans or programmes and the works or interventions subject to assessment.
From the date of entry into force of part two of this decree, the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of August 10, 1988, no. 377, on waste management plants subject to environmental impact assessment of state competence, shall not apply, it being understood that, for the works or interventions subject to environmental impact assessment, until the issuance of the regulations referred to in paragraph 1, the provisions of Art. 2 of the aforementioned decree shall continue to apply, insofar as they are compatible.
The supplementary technical standards of the discipline referred to in Title III of part two of this decree, concerning the preparation of environmental impact studies and the formulation of compatibility judgments in relation to each category of works, are issued by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers competent for the matter and having heard the Committee referred to in Article 6.
The technical standards issued in implementation of the legal provisions referred to in Article 48, including the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of December 27, 1988, published in the Official Gazette no. 4 of January 5, 1989, remain in force until the issuance of the corresponding rules referred to in paragraph 3.
With a subsequent decree, adopted by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance and with the Minister of Productive Activities, provision will be made to merge into a single measure, indicating the single competent authority, the various environmental authorizations in the case of plants not falling within the scope of application of Legislative Decree no. 59 of February 18, 2005, but subject to more than one sector-specific environmental authorization.

Art. 52
Entry into force
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 49 and 50, part two of this decree shall enter into force on July 31, 2007.*
The administrative procedures in progress on the date of entry into force of part two of this decree, as well as the procedures for which an introductory application has already been formally submitted by the interested party by that date, shall be concluded in accordance with the provisions and the attributions of competence in force at the time of the submission of said application.
*NOTE: the original term of 120 days was extended to January 31, 2007, by Art. 1 septies of Decree-Law no. 173/2006, introduced during conversion into Law no. 228 of July 12, 2006 (G.U. no. 160 of 12/7/2006); subsequently, it was further extended to July 31, 2007, by effect of Art. 5 of D.L. no. 300 of December 28, 2006 - the so-called "Milleproroghe Decree" (G.U. no. 300 of 28/12/2006), converted into Law no. 17/2007 (G.U. no. 47 of 26.2.2007, S.O. no. 48).
PART III - PROVISIONS ON SOIL PROTECTION AND THE FIGHT AGAINST DESERTIFICATION, ON THE PROTECTION OF WATERS FROM POLLUTION, AND ON THE MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES
SECTION I - PROVISIONS ON SOIL PROTECTION AND THE FIGHT AGAINST DESERTIFICATION
TITLE I - GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND COMPETENCES
CHAPTER I - GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Art. 53
Objectives
The provisions of this section are aimed at ensuring the protection and remediation of the soil and subsoil, the hydrogeological restoration of the territory through the prevention of instability phenomena, the securing of at-risk situations, and the fight against desertification.
To achieve the objectives referred to in paragraph 1, the public administration shall carry out any appropriate action of a cognitive, programming, and planning nature for the interventions, as well as being responsible for their execution, in accordance with the following provisions.
The State, the regions with special and ordinary statutes, the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, the provinces, the municipalities, and the mountain communities and the land reclamation and irrigation consortia shall contribute to the realization of the activities provided for in paragraph 1, according to their respective competences.
Art. 54
Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
a) soil: the territory, the soil, the subsoil, inhabited areas, and infrastructural works;
b) waters: meteoric waters and surface and ground waters as specified below;
c) surface waters: inland waters, with the exception of groundwater, transitional waters, and coastal waters, except with regard to chemical status, for which territorial waters are also included;
d) groundwater: all water which is below the surface of the ground in the saturation zone and in direct contact with the ground or subsoil;
e) inland waters: all standing or flowing surface waters and all groundwater landward of the baseline from which the breadth of territorial waters is measured;
f) river: a body of inland water flowing largely on the surface of the land but which may flow underground for part of its course;
g) lake: a body of standing inland surface water;
h) transitional waters: bodies of surface water in the vicinity of river mouths which are partly saline in character as a result of their proximity to coastal waters but which are substantially influenced by freshwater flows;
i) coastal waters: surface water on the landward side of a line every point of which is at a distance of one nautical mile on the seaward side from the nearest point of the baseline from which the breadth of territorial waters is measured, extending, where appropriate, up to the outer limit of transitional waters;
l) surface water body: a discrete and significant element of surface water such as a lake, a reservoir, a stream, river or canal, part of a stream, river or canal, transitional waters or a stretch of coastal water;
m) artificial water body: a surface water body created by human activity;
n) heavily modified water body: a surface water body which as a result of physical alterations by human activity is substantially changed in character;
o) groundwater body: a distinct volume of groundwater within an aquifer or aquifers;
p) aquifer: a subsurface layer or layers of rock or other geological strata of sufficient porosity and permeability to allow either a significant flow of groundwater or the abstraction of significant quantities of groundwater;
q) hydrographic network: the set of elements that constitute the channelized drainage system of the hydrographic basin;
r) river basin: the area of land from which all surface run-off flows through a sequence of streams, rivers and, possibly, lakes into the sea at a single river mouth, estuary or delta;
s) sub-basin: the area of land from which all surface run-off flows through a series of streams, rivers and, possibly, lakes to a particular point in a water course, usually a lake or a river confluence;
t) river basin district: the area of land and sea, made up of one or more neighbouring river basins together with their associated groundwaters and coastal waters, which is identified as the main unit for management of river basins;
u) soil protection: the complex of actions and activities related to the protection and safeguarding of the territory, rivers, canals and collectors, lakes, lagoons, the coastal strip, groundwater, as well as the territory connected to them, having the purposes of reducing hydraulic risk, stabilizing geological instability phenomena, optimizing the use and management of the water heritage, and enhancing the related environmental and landscape characteristics;
v) hydrogeological instability: the condition that characterizes areas where natural or anthropic processes, related to the dynamics of water bodies, soil, or slopes, determine risk conditions on the territory;
z) hydraulic work: the set of elements that constitute the channelized drainage system of the hydrographic basin.
Art. 55
Cognitive activity(*)
The cognitive activity, carried out for the purposes of Article 53 and referring to the entire national territory, is understood to include the actions of:
a) collection, processing, archiving, and dissemination of data;
b) assessment, experimentation, research, and study of the elements of the physical environment and the general risk conditions;
c) formation and updating of thematic maps of the territory;
d) assessment and study of the effects resulting from the execution of the plans, programmes, and projects of works provided for in this section;
e) implementation of any cognitive initiative deemed necessary for the achievement of the purposes of Article 53.
The cognitive activity referred to in this article is carried out, based on the deliberations of Article 57, paragraph 1, according to criteria, methods, and standards of collection, processing, and consultation, as well as methods of coordination and collaboration between the public subjects in any case operating in the sector, which guarantee the possibility of homogeneous processing and analysis and the establishment and management, by the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and Technical Services (APAT) referred to in Art. 38 of Legislative Decree no. 300 of July 30, 1999, of a single information system, to which the regional and autonomous province information systems are to be connected.
It is mandatory for the State Administrations, including those with autonomous status, as well as for institutions and public bodies, including economic ones, which in any case collect data in the soil protection sector, to transmit them to the territorially interested region and to the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and Technical Services (APAT), according to the methods defined pursuant to paragraph 2 of this article.
The National Association of Italian Municipalities (ANCI) contributes to the carrying out of the cognitive activity of this article, in particular for the purposes of implementing the initiatives of paragraph 1, letter e), as well as for the purposes of disseminating environmental information referred to in Articles 8 and 9 of Legislative Decree no. 195 of August 19, 2005, implementing Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of January 28, 2003, and in implementation of the provisions of Article 1 of Law no. 144 of May 17, 1999, and also with regard to:
a) air pollution;
b) water pollution, river requalification, and integrated water cycle;
c) acoustic, electromagnetic, and light pollution;
d) territorial protection;
e) sustainable development;
f) integrated waste cycle;
g) energy from renewable energy sources;
h) parks and protected areas.
ANCI provides for the exercise of the activities of paragraph 4 through the collection and processing of data necessary for monitoring environmental expenditure on the national territory under a convention with the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, the criteria and methods for exercising the aforementioned activities are defined. For the carrying out of the latter, a sum not less than one and fifty percent of the amount of the annual spendable mass of investment expenditure provided for the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory is allocated, within the limits of the expenditure provisions of the existing convention. For the financial year 2006, the above charge is covered by the fund to be distributed for soil protection and environmental protection.
(*) Note: The following is paragraph 1132 of Art. 1 of the 2007 Finance Law: "1132. (...) Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 55 and 56 of Legislative Decree no. 152 of April 3, 2006, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, as well as the administrations and territorial bodies, shall transmit quarterly to the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Sea and to the Agency for Environmental Protection and Technical Services (APAT), the information regarding the activities of their own competence in matters of soil protection and the fight against desertification, of the protection of waters from pollution and of the management of water resources, and the prevention of hydrogeological instability. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Sea, by his own decree, establishes an Observatory for the collection, updating, processing, and dissemination of the data being monitored."

Art. 56
Planning, programming, and implementation activities(*)
The programming, planning, and implementation activities of the interventions intended to achieve the purposes of Article 53 concern, without prejudice to the institutional competences and activities of the National Civil Protection Service, in particular:
a) the arrangement, conservation, and recovery of the soil in river basins, with hydrogeological, hydraulic, hydraulic-forestry, hydraulic-agricultural, silvo-pastoral, afforestation, and land reclamation interventions, including through naturalistic, botanical, and faunistic recovery processes;
b) the protection, arrangement, and regulation of watercourses, the terminal branches of rivers and their mouths into the sea, as well as wetlands;
c) the moderation of floods, also by means of storage reservoirs, lamination basins, expansion tanks, spillways, floodways, diversions, or other means, for protection against floods and inundations;
d) the regulation of extractive activities in watercourses, lakes, lagoons, and the sea, in order to prevent the instability of the territory, including erosion and lowering of riverbeds and coasts;
e) the protection and consolidation of slopes and unstable areas, as well as the protection of inhabited areas and infrastructures against landslides, avalanches, and other instability phenomena;
f) the containment of land subsidence phenomena and the rise of sea water along rivers and in aquifers, also through operations to restore the pre-existing equilibrium conditions and groundwater tables;
g) the protection of coasts and inhabited areas from the invasion and erosion of sea water and the nourishment of beaches, also through works to reconstruct dune ridges;
h) the rational use of surface and deep water resources, with an efficient hydraulic, irrigation, and water network, ensuring, in any case, that the set of diversions does not prejudice the minimum vital flow in the downstream riverbeds as well as water policing;
i) the functional performance of hydraulic police services, inland navigation, as well as the management of the related plants;
l) the ordinary and extraordinary maintenance of the works and plants in the sector and the conservation of assets;
m) the regulation of the territories affected by the interventions referred to in the preceding letters for the purposes of their environmental protection, also by determining criteria for the safeguarding and conservation of state-owned areas and the establishment of river and lake parks and protected areas;
n) the reorganization of the hydrogeological constraint.
The activities referred to in paragraph 1 are carried out according to criteria, methods, and standards, as well as methods of coordination and collaboration between the public subjects in any case competent, aimed, among other things, at ensuring homogeneity of:
a) conditions for the safeguarding of human life and the territory, including inhabited areas and assets;
b) methods of use of resources and assets, and of management of related services.
CHAPTER II - COMPETENCES
Art. 57
President of the Council of Ministers, Committee of Ministers for interventions in the soil protection sector
The President of the Council of Ministers, after deliberation by the Council of Ministers, approves by his own decree:
a) on the proposal of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory:
the deliberations concerning the methods and criteria, including technical ones, for carrying out the activities referred to in Articles 55 and 56, as well as for the verification and control of the basin plans and intervention programmes;
the basin plans, having heard the State-Regions Conference;
the acts aimed at providing in a substitutive capacity, after formal notice, in case of persistent inactivity of the subjects to whom the functions provided for by this section are entrusted;
any other act of direction and coordination in the sector disciplined by this section.
b) on the proposal of the Committee of Ministers referred to in paragraph 2, the national intervention programme.
The Committee of Ministers for interventions in the soil protection sector operates at the Presidency of the Council of Ministers. The Committee, chaired by the President of the Council of Ministers or, on his delegation, by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, is composed of the latter and the Ministers of Infrastructure and Transport, of Productive Activities, of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, for Regional Affairs, and for Cultural Heritage and Activities, as well as by the delegate of the President of the Council of Ministers in matters of civil protection.
The Committee of Ministers has functions of high supervision and adopts the acts of direction and coordination of the activities. It proposes to the President of the Council of Ministers the draft national intervention programme, which it coordinates with those of the regions and other public bodies of a national character, verifying its implementation.
In order to ensure the necessary coordination between the various interested administrations, the Committee of Ministers proposes the directions of the sectoral policies directly or indirectly connected with the objectives and contents of district planning and verifies their coherence in the approval phase of the relevant acts.
For the performance of the technical secretariat functions, the Committee of Ministers avails itself of the structures of the competent State Administrations.
The principles of the acts of direction and coordination of this article are defined after hearing the Permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento
For the performance of technical secretariat functions, the Committee of Ministers makes use of the structures of the competent state Administrations.
The principles of the acts of guidance and coordination referred to in this article are defined after consulting the Standing Conference for relations between the State, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano.

Article 58
Powers of the Minister of the Environment and Land Protection

The Minister of the Environment and Land Protection exercises the functions and tasks pertaining to the State in the matters governed by this section, without prejudice to the institutional competences of the National Civil Protection Service.
In particular, the Minister of the Environment and Land Protection:

a) formulates proposals, after consulting the State-Regions Conference, for the purposes of adoption, pursuant to Article 57, of the guidelines and criteria for carrying out the hydraulic police service, inland navigation and for the implementation, management and maintenance of the works and plants and the conservation of assets;
b) it prepares the report on land use and on the conditions of the hydrogeological structure, to be attached to the report on the state of the environment referred to in Article 1, paragraph 6, of Law No. 349 of July 8, 1986, as well as the report on the state of implementation of the three-year programs of intervention for soil protection, referred to in Article 69, to be attached to the provisional and programmatic report. The report on land use and the conditions of the hydrogeological structure and the report on the state of the environment are drawn up using the services of the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT);
c) it operates, pursuant to Article 2, paragraphs 5 and 6, of Law No. 349 of July 8, 1986, to ensure the coordination, at every level of planning, of the functions of soil protection with interventions for the protection and utilization of waters and for the protection of the environment.
3. For the purposes referred to in paragraph 2, the Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea performs the following functions:
a) programming, financing, and control of interventions in the field of soil protection;
b) forecasting, prevention, and protection of the soil from landslides, floods, and other phenomena of hydrogeological instability, in the medium and long term, in order to guarantee permanent and homogeneous environmental conditions, without prejudice to the powers of the Department of Civil Protection regarding emergency interventions;
c) guidance and coordination of the activity of the Ministry's representatives within the district basin authorities referred to in Article 63;
d) identification of the fundamental lines of the national territory's structure with reference to natural and environmental values and soil protection, as well as with regard to the environmental impact of the territorial articulation of infrastructure networks, works of state competence, and territorial transformations;
e) determination of criteria, methods, and standards for the collection, processing, by the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT), and consultation of data, definition of methods of coordination and collaboration between public entities operating in the sector, as well as definition of guidelines for the assessment and study of the elements of the physical environment and the general conditions of risk;
f) evaluation of the effects resulting from the execution of plans, programs, and projects on a national scale for works in the soil protection sector;
g) coordination of cartographic systems.
Art. 59
Competencies of the State-Regions Conference
The State-Regions Conference formulates opinions, proposals, and observations, also for the purposes of exercising the functions of guidance and coordination referred to in Article 57, regarding the activities and purposes of this section, and whenever requested by the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea. In particular:
a) it formulates proposals for the adoption of the guidelines, methods, and criteria referred to in the aforementioned Article 57;
b) it formulates proposals for the constant scientific and organizational adaptation of the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT) and for its coordination with the services, institutes, offices, and public and private entities that carry out survey, study, and research activities in matters directly or indirectly concerning the soil protection sector;
c) it formulates observations on basin plans, for the purpose of their conformity with the guidelines and criteria referred to in Article 57;
d) it expresses opinions on the allocation of the funds authorized by each three-year program among the subjects responsible for the implementation of the works and interventions identified by the basin plans;
e) it expresses opinions on intervention programs of state competence.
Art. 60
Competencies of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services - APAT
Without prejudice to the competencies and institutional activities proper to the National Civil Protection Service, the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT) exercises, through the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department, the following functions:
a) to carry out the cognitive activity, as defined in Article 55;
b) to create the single information system and the integrated national network of survey and surveillance;
c) to provide, to anyone who requests it, data, opinions, and consultancy, according to a tariff set every two years by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance. The tariffs are established based on the principle of participation in the cost of the services by the user.
Art. 61
Competencies of the regions
The regions, without prejudice to the activities they carry out within the scope of the competencies of the National Civil Protection Service, where necessary in agreement with each other, exercise the functions and tasks assigned to them within the framework of their constitutionally determined competencies and in compliance with state attributions, and in particular:
a) they collaborate in the survey and in the elaboration of the basin plans of the hydrographic districts according to the directives assumed by the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4, and adopt the acts of their competence;
b) they formulate proposals for the formation of programs and for the drafting of studies and projects relating to the hydrographic districts;
c) they provide for the elaboration, adoption, approval, and implementation of the protection plans referred to in Article 121;
d) for the part of their own competence, they arrange for the drafting and provide for the approval and execution of the projects, interventions, and works to be carried out in the hydrographic districts, establishing, where necessary, common managements;
e) they provide, for the part of their own competence, for the organization and functioning of the hydraulic police service and those for the management and maintenance of the works and plants and the conservation of assets;
f) they provide for the organization and functioning of inland navigation, without prejudice to the residual competencies of the Ministry of Infrastructures and Transport;
g) they annually prepare the report on land use and on the conditions of the hydrogeological structure of the territory of competence and on the state of implementation of the current three-year program and transmit it to the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea by the month of December;
h) they assume any other initiative deemed necessary in matters of conservation and protection of the territory, of the soil and subsoil, and of protection and use of waters in the hydrographic basins of competence and exercise any other function provided for by this section.
The Italian Dams Register (RID) provides exclusively, including in seismic zones, for the identification and control of the projects of damming works, detention dams, or weirs that exceed 15 meters in height or that determine a reservoir volume greater than 1,000,000 cubic meters. All damming works that create reservoirs used exclusively for the deposit, decantation, or washing of industrial residues remain within the competence of the Ministry of Productive Activities.
The attributions referred to in the Decree of the President of the Republic No. 1363 of November 1, 1959, for dams that do not exceed 15 meters in height and that determine a reservoir not exceeding 1,000,000 cubic meters fall within the competence of the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano. For such dams, where placed at the service of large water diversions of state competence, the attributions of the Ministry of Infrastructures and Transport remain firm. The Italian Dams Register (RID) provides the regions with the required technical support.
The technical regulations relating to the design and construction of dams of any height and reservoir capacity remain of state competence.
The functions relating to the hydrogeological constraint referred to in Royal Decree-Law No. 3267 of December 30, 1923, are entirely exercised by the regions.
All other administrative functions already transferred or delegated to the regions remain firm.
Art. 62
Competencies of local authorities and other subjects
The municipalities, the provinces, their consortia or associations, the mountain communities, the land reclamation and irrigation consortia, the mountain river basin consortia, and the other public entities and entities of public law based in the hydrographic district participate in the exercise of regional functions in matters of soil protection in the ways and forms established by the regions individually or in agreement with each other, within the scope of the competencies of the system of local autonomies.
The entities referred to in paragraph 1 may avail themselves, on the basis of specific agreements, of the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT) and are required to collaborate with it.
Art. 63
District River Basin Authority
In each hydrographic district referred to in Article 64, the District River Basin Authority, hereinafter the Basin Authority, is established, a non-economic public body that operates in accordance with the objectives of this section and conforms its activity to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, economy, and publicity.
The organs of the Basin Authority are: the Permanent Institutional Conference, the Secretary-General, the Technical-Operational Secretariat, and the Operational Conference of Services. By decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance and with the Minister for Public Function, to be issued after consulting the permanent State-Regions Conference within thirty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the criteria and methods for the attribution or transfer of personnel and of patrimonial and financial resources are defined, safeguarding the occupational levels defined as of December 31, 2005, and after consultation with the trade unions.
The basin authorities provided for by Law No. 183 of May 18, 1989, are suppressed as of April 30, 2006, and their functions are exercised by the District River Basin Authorities referred to in the third part of this decree. The decree referred to in paragraph 2 regulates the transfer of functions and the transitional period.
The acts of guidance, coordination, and planning of the Basin Authorities are adopted in the Permanent Institutional Conference chaired and convened, also on the proposal of the participating administrations, by the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea at the request of the Secretary-General, who participates without voting rights. The Permanent Institutional Conference is attended by the Ministers of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, of Infrastructures and Transport, of Productive Activities, of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, for Public Function, for Cultural Heritage and Activities or the Undersecretaries delegated by them, as well as the Presidents of the regions and autonomous provinces whose territory is interested by the hydrographic district or the Assessors delegated by them, in addition to the delegate of the Department of Civil Protection. The permanent institutional conferences of the hydrographic district of Sardinia and the hydrographic district of Sicily are attended by, in addition to the Presidents of the respective regions, two other representatives for each of the said regions, appointed by the regional Presidents. The permanent institutional conference deliberates by a majority. The planning acts take into account the financial resources provided for by current legislation.
The permanent institutional conference referred to in paragraph 4:
a) adopts criteria and methods for the elaboration of the Basin Plan in accordance with the guidelines and criteria of Article 57;
b) identifies times and methods for the adoption of the Basin Plan, which may eventually be articulated in plans referring to sub-basins;
c) determines which components of the plan constitute the exclusive interest of the individual regions and which constitute common interests to several regions;
d) adopts the necessary measures to ensure in any case the elaboration of the Basin Plan;
e) adopts the Basin Plan;
f) it controls the implementation of the forecast and programmatic schemes of the Basin Plan and of the three-year programs and, in case of serious delay in the execution of interventions not of state competence with respect to the times set in the program, it warns the defaulting administration, setting the maximum term for the start of the works. If this term passes without result, the President of the interested Regional Council provides for the adoption of the necessary measures to ensure the start of the works, and for this purpose, may use the decentralized and peripheral bodies of the Ministry of Infrastructures and Transport;
g) it appoints the Secretary-General.
The Operational Conference of Services is composed of representatives of the Ministries referred to in paragraph 4, of the interested regions and autonomous provinces, as well as a representative of the Department of Civil Protection; it is convened by the Secretary-General, who presides over it, and provides for the implementation and execution of what is disposed pursuant to paragraph 5, as well as for the completion of management acts. The operational conference of services deliberates by a majority.
The Basin Authorities provide, taking into account the financial resources provided for by current legislation:
a) for the elaboration of the district Basin Plan referred to in Article 65;
b) to express an opinion on the coherence with the objectives of the Basin Plan of the community, national, regional, and local plans and programs relating to soil protection, the fight against desertification, the protection of waters, and the management of water resources;
c) for the elaboration, according to the technical specifications that appear in the annexes to the third part of this decree, of an analysis of the characteristics of the district, an examination of the impact of human activities on the state of surface waters and groundwater, as well as an economic analysis of water use.
Without prejudice to the disciplines adopted by the regions pursuant to Article 62, the Basin Authorities coordinate and supervise the activities and functions of ownership of the consortia of integral land reclamation referred to in Royal Decree No. 215 of February 13, 1933, as well as of the consortium of the Ticino - Autonomous Body for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the regulating work of Lake Maggiore, of the consortium of the Oglio - Autonomous Body for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the regulating work of Lake Iseo, and of the consortium of the Adda - Autonomous Body for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the regulating work of Lake Como, with particular regard to the execution, maintenance, and operation of hydraulic and reclamation works, to the realization of actions of environmental safeguarding and restoration of waters, also for the purpose of their irrigation use, to the renaturalization of watercourses and to phytodepuration.
TITLE II - THE HYDROGRAPHIC DISTRICTS, THE INSTRUMENTS, THE INTERVENTIONS
CHAPTER I - THE HYDROGRAPHIC DISTRICTS
Art. 64
Hydrographic districts
The entire national territory, including the smaller islands, is divided into the following hydrographic districts:
a) hydrographic district of the Eastern Alps, with a surface area of approximately 39,385 sq km, comprising the following hydrographic basins:
Adige, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of May 18, 1989;
Alto Adriatico, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Lemene, Fissaro Tartaro Canalbianco, already interregional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Friuli-Venezia Giulia and Veneto, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
b) Padano hydrographic district, with a surface area of approximately 74,115 sq km, comprising the Po basin, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
c) hydrographic district of the northern Apennines, with a surface area of approximately 39,000 sq km, comprising the following hydrographic basins:
Arno, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Magra, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Fiora, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Conca Marecchia, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Reno, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Liguria, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Tuscany, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
rivers Uniti, Montone, Ronco, Savio, Rubicone, and Uso, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Foglia, Arzilla, Metauro, Cesano, Misa, Esino, Musone and other minor basins, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Lamone, already a regional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
minor basins afferent to the Romagna coast, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
d) pilot hydrographic district of the Serchio, with a surface area of approximately 1,600 sq km, comprising the hydrographic basin of the Serchio;
e) hydrographic district of the central Apennines, with a surface area of approximately 35,800 sq km, comprising the following hydrographic basins:
Tevere, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Tronto, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Sangro, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Abruzzo, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Lazio, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Potenza, Chienti, Tenna, Ete, Aso, Menocchia, Tesino and minor basins of Marche, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
f) hydrographic district of the southern Apennines, with a surface area of approximately 68,200 sq km, comprising the following hydrographic basins:
Liri-Garigliano, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Volturno, already a national basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Sele, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Sinni and Noce, already interregional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Bradano, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Saccione, Fortore and Biferno, already interregional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Ofanto, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Lao, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
Trigno, already an interregional basin pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Campania, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Puglia, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Basilicata, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Calabria, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
basins of Molise, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
g) hydrographic district of Sardinia, with a surface area of approximately 24,000 sq km, comprising the basins of Sardinia, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989;
h) hydrographic district of Sicily, with a surface area of approximately 26,000 sq km, comprising the basins of Sicily, already regional basins pursuant to Law No. 183 of 1989.
CHAPTER II - THE INSTRUMENTS
Art. 65
Value, purpose and contents of the district basin plan
The district basin plan, hereinafter Basin Plan, has the value of a sectoral territorial plan and is the cognitive, normative, and technical-operational instrument through which actions and use regulations aimed at the conservation, protection, and enhancement of the soil and the correct use of waters are planned and programmed, on the basis of the physical and environmental characteristics of the affected territory.
The Basin Plan is drawn up by the Basin Authority based on the guidelines, methods, and criteria established pursuant to paragraph 3. Studies and interventions are conducted with particular reference to mountain basins, high valley torrents, and valley-bottom watercourses.
The Basin Plan, in conformity with the guidelines, methods, and criteria established by the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4, achieves the purposes indicated in Article 56 and, in particular, contains, together with the elements referred to in Annex 4 to the third part of this decree:
a) the organized and updated cognitive framework of the physical system, of the land uses provided for by the municipal and inter-municipal urban planning instruments, as well as of the constraints, relating to the district, referred to in Legislative Decree No. 42 of January 22, 2004;
b) the identification and quantification of the situations, both existing and potential, of degradation of the physical system, as well as their relative causes;
c) the directives to which the soil protection, hydrogeological and hydraulic arrangement, and the use of waters and soils must conform;
d) the indication of the necessary works distinguished by function:
of the dangers of flooding and the gravity and extent of the instability;
of the dangers of drought;
of the dangers of landslides, earth movements and similar;
of the pursuit of the objectives of social and economic development or of territorial rebalancing as well as the time necessary to ensure the effectiveness of the interventions;
e) the programming and use of water, agricultural, forestry, and extractive resources;
f) the identification of prescriptions, constraints, and hydraulic, hydraulic-agricultural, hydraulic-forestry, afforestation, hydraulic reclamation, stabilization, and consolidation works of the land and any other action or rule of use or constraint aimed at the conservation of the soil and the protection of the environment;
g) the continuation and completion of the works indicated in letter f), if they have already been undertaken with allocations provided for by special laws, by ordinary laws, or following the approval of the relative programming acts;
h) the protection, consolidation, and arrangement works of the marine coasts that subtend the hydrographic district;
i) the reward mechanisms in favor of the owners of agricultural and wooded areas who implement interventions suitable to prevent phenomena of hydrogeological instability;
l) the preventive evaluation, also for the purpose of choosing between different governance and management hypotheses, of the cost-benefit ratio, of the environmental impact and of the financial resources for the main planned interventions;
m) the regulations and interventions aimed at regulating the extraction of lithoid materials from the fluvial, lacustrine, and maritime state property and the relative buffer zones, specifically identified according to the good regime of the waters and the protection of the geostatic and geomorphological balance of the land and the coasts;
n) the indication of the zones to be subjected to special constraints and prescriptions in relation to the specific hydrogeological conditions, for the purposes of soil conservation, the protection of the environment and the prevention against presumed harmful effects of anthropic interventions;
o) the measures to combat the phenomena of subsidence and desertification, also through programs and interventions useful to guarantee greater availability of the water resource and its reuse;
p) the cognitive survey of the diversions in progress with specification of the energy, drinking water, irrigation or other purposes and of the flow rates;
q) the survey of different uses for fishing, navigation or other;
r) the plan of possible future uses both for diversions and for other purposes, distinguished by type of use and according to the quantity;
s) the priorities of the interventions and their organic development over time, in relation to the severity of the instability;
t) the indication of the financial resources provided for by current legislation.
The provisions of the approved Basin Plan are immediately binding for public administrations and bodies, as well as for private subjects, where it is a matter of prescriptions declared to be of such effectiveness by the Basin Plan itself. In particular, the socio-economic development plans and programs and of land use and planning must be coordinated, or in any case not in conflict, with the approved Basin Plan.
For the purposes of paragraph 4, within twelve months of the approval of the Basin Plan, the competent authorities shall adapt their respective territorial plans and regional programs such as, in particular, those relating to agricultural, zootechnical, and agroforestry activities, to the protection of the quality of waters, to waste management, to the protection of environmental assets, and to land reclamation.
Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 4, the regions, within ninety days from the date of publication of the Basin Plan in their respective regional Official Bulletins, shall issue, where necessary, the provisions concerning the implementation of the plan itself in the urban planning sector. Once this term has passed, the territorial entities interested by the Basin Plan are in any case required to respect its prescriptions in the urban planning sector. If the aforementioned entities do not provide for the adoption of the necessary fulfilments relating to their urban planning instruments within six months from the date of communication of the aforementioned provisions, and in any case within nine months from the publication of the approval of the Basin Plan, the regions shall provide for the adjustment ex officio.
Pending the approval of the Basin Plan, the Basin Authorities adopt safeguard measures with particular reference to mountain basins, high valley torrents, and valley-bottom watercourses and to the contents of letters b), c), f), m) and n) of paragraph 3. The safeguard measures are immediately binding and remain in force until the approval of the Basin Plan and in any case for a period not exceeding three years. In case of non-implementation or non-observance, by the regions, provinces, and municipalities, of the safeguard measures, and if a serious damage to the territory may derive from this, the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, after a warning to comply within a suitable term to be indicated in the same warning, adopts with a cautionary order the necessary provisional safeguard measures, also with inhibitory effect of works, or of anthropic activities, giving prior communication to the competent administrations. If the non-implementation or non-observance referred to in this paragraph concerns a peripheral office of the State, the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea informs without delay the competent Minister on whom the office depends, who takes the necessary measures to ensure compliance. If the need for a cautionary intervention remains to avoid serious damage to the territory, the competent Minister, in concert with the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, adopts the cautionary order referred to in this paragraph.
The basin plans can be drawn up and approved also for sub-basins or for sectoral excerpts, which, in any case, must constitute sequential and interrelated phases with respect to the contents of paragraph 3. The systemic consideration of the territory must in any case be guaranteed and the appropriate inhibitory and cautionary measures must be disposed, pursuant to paragraph 7, in relation to the aspects not yet completely regulated.
The implementation of this article must not give rise to new or greater charges for public finance.
Art. 66
Adoption and approval of basin plans
The basin plans, before their approval, are subjected to strategic environmental assessment (SEA) at the state level, according to the procedure provided for by the second part of this decree.
The Basin Plan, accompanied by the relative environmental report for the purposes of paragraph 1, is adopted by a majority by the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4, which, with its own deliberation, simultaneously establishes:
a) the terms for the adoption by the regions of the consequent provisions;
b) which components of the plan constitute the exclusive interest of the single regions and which constitute common interests to two or more regions.
The Basin Plan, accompanied by the relative environmental report referred to in paragraph 2, is sent to the components of the Permanent Institutional Conference at least twenty days before the date set for the conference; in case of a majority decision, the deliberation of adoption must provide an adequate and analytical motivation with respect to the dissenting opinions expressed during the conference.
In case of inertia regarding regional fulfilments, the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, after a warning to comply within a suitable term and having heard the interested region, takes the necessary measures, including the appointment of an "ad acta" commissioner, to guarantee in any case the carrying out of the procedures and the adoption of the necessary acts for the formation of the plan.
Notice of the adoption of the plan is given in the forms and with the methods provided for by the second part of this decree for the purposes of carrying out the strategic environmental assessment (SEA) procedure at the state level.
Once the strategic environmental assessment (SEA) procedure is concluded, on the basis of the judgment of environmental compatibility expressed by the competent authority, the basin plans are approved by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, with the methods referred to in Article 57, paragraph 1, letter a), number 2), and are then published in the Official Gazette and in the Official Bulletins of the territorially competent regions.
The Basin Authorities promote the active participation of all interested parties in the elaboration, review, and updating of the basin plans, providing so that, for each hydrographic district, the following documents are published and made available for possible observations from the public, including users, granting a minimum period of six months for the presentation of written observations:
a) the calendar and the work program for the presentation of the plan, including a declaration of the consultative measures that must be taken at least three years before the beginning of the period to which the plan refers;
b) a provisional global assessment of the main water management problems, identified in the hydrographic basin at least two years before the beginning of the period to which the plan refers;
c) copies of the draft basin plan, at least one year before the beginning of the period to which the plan refers.
Art. 67
Sectoral plans for the protection from hydrogeological risk and prevention measures for risk areas
Pending the approval of the basin plans, the Basin Authorities adopt, pursuant to Article 65, paragraph 8, district sectoral plans for the hydrogeological structure (PAI), which contain in particular the identification of the areas at hydrogeological risk, the perimeter of the areas to be subjected to safeguard measures, and the determination of the same measures.
The Basin Authorities, also in derogation of the procedures of Article 66, also approve extraordinary plans aimed at removing the situations of highest hydrogeological risk, drawn up also on the basis of the proposals of the regions and local authorities. The extraordinary plans must primarily include the areas at hydrogeological risk for which a state of emergency has been declared, pursuant to Article 5 of Law No. 225 of February 24, 1992. The extraordinary plans contain in particular the identification and the perimeter of the areas at very high hydrogeological risk for the safety of persons and for the security of infrastructures and of the environmental and cultural heritage. For these areas, safeguard measures are adopted pursuant to Article 65, paragraph 7, also with reference to the contents of paragraph 3, letter d), of the same Article 65. In case of inertia on the part of the Basin Authorities, the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Committee of Ministers, referred to in Article 57, paragraph 2, adopts the acts relating to the identification, perimeter, and safeguarding of the aforementioned areas. If the safeguard measures are adopted in the absence of the sectoral plans referred to in paragraph 1, they remain in force until the approval of said plans. The approved extraordinary plans can be integrated and modified with the same methods as in this paragraph, in particular with reference to the interventions carried out for the purpose of making the interested areas safe.
The Committee of Ministers referred to in Article 57, paragraph 2, taking into account the programs already adopted by the Basin Authorities and the extraordinary plans of paragraph 2 of this article, defines, in agreement with the State-Regions Conference, programs of urgent interventions, also through maintenance actions of the hydrographic districts, for the reduction of hydrogeological risk in the areas where the greater vulnerability of the territory is connected with higher dangers for people, things, and the environmental heritage, with priority for the areas where a state of emergency has been declared, pursuant to Article 5 of Law No. 225 of February 24, 1992. For the realization of the interventions, the ordinances referred to in Article 5, paragraph 2, of Law No. 225 of February 24, 1992, may be adopted, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea and the Minister of Infrastructures and Transport, and in agreement with the interested regions.
For the preliminary activity relating to the fulfilments of paragraphs 1, 2, and 3, the competent Ministers avail themselves, without new or greater charges for public finance, of the Department of Civil Protection, as well as of the collaboration of the State Forestry Corps, of the regions, of the Basin Authorities, of the National Group for the Defense from Hydrogeological Disasters of the National Research Council and, for environmental aspects, of the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT), for their respective competencies.
Within six months from the adoption of the measures referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 4, the civil protection bodies provide for the preparation, for the areas at hydrogeological risk, with priority assigned to those in which the greater vulnerability of the territory is connected with higher dangers for people, things, and the environmental heritage, of urgent emergency plans containing measures for the safeguarding of the safety of the interested populations, including early warning, alarm, and preventive rescue.
The sectoral plans referred to in paragraph 1 identify the infrastructures and the artifacts that determine the hydrogeological risk. On the basis of these identifications, the regions establish the incentive measures to which the proprietary subjects can access in order to adapt the infrastructures and to relocate the productive activities and private dwellings outside the risk area. To this end, the regions, having acquired the opinion of the interested local authorities, prepare, with priority criteria connected to the level of risk, a plan for the adaptation of the infrastructures, also determining a suitable term, and for the granting of financial incentives for the relocation of productive activities and private dwellings built in conformity with the urban planning-building regulations or condoned. The incentives are activated within the limits of the share of funds received pursuant to Article 86, paragraph 2, of Legislative Decree No. 112 of March 31, 1998, and also concern the costs for the demolition of the artifacts; the resulting land is acquired into the non-disposable heritage of the municipalities. The demolition of the artifacts is carried out with the methods provided for by the current regulations. If the interested subjects do not avail themselves of the faculty to use the aforementioned incentives, they shall forfeit any benefits connected to the damages deriving to their settlements as a consequence of the occurrence of natural disasters.
The acts referred to in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of this article must contain the indication of the means for their realization and the relative financial coverage.

Art. 68
Procedure for the adoption of sectoral plan projects
The projects of the sectoral plan for the protection from hydrogeological risk, referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 67, are not subject to strategic environmental assessment (SEA) and are adopted with the methods of Article 66.
The adoption of the sectoral plans for the hydrogeological structure must take place, on the basis of the available acts and opinions, within and no later than six months from the date of adoption of the relative plan project.
For the purposes of the adoption and implementation of the sectoral plans and the necessary coherence between district planning and territorial planning, the regions convene a programmatic conference, articulated by provincial sections, or by another territorial area deliberated by the regions themselves, in which the interested provinces and municipalities participate, together with the region and a representative of the Basin Authority.
The conference referred to in paragraph 3 expresses an opinion on the plan project with particular reference to the integration on a provincial and municipal scale of the contents of the plan, providing for the necessary hydrogeological and urban planning prescriptions.
CHAPTER III - THE INTERVENTIONS
Art. 69
Intervention programs
The basin plans are implemented through three-year intervention programs that are drawn up taking into account the guidelines and purposes of the plans themselves and contain the indication of the means to face them and the relative financial coverage.
The three-year programs must allocate a share of not less than fifteen percent of the total allocations to:
a) ordinary maintenance interventions of the works, plants, and assets, including means, equipment, and materials of the workshop-sites and hydraulic warehouses;
b) carrying out the service of hydraulic police, inland navigation, flood, and prompt hydraulic intervention;
c) compilation and updating of basin plans, carrying out of studies, surveys or other in matters concerning soil protection, drafting of general projects, feasibility studies, projects of works, and environmental impact assessment studies of the main works.
The regions, having obtained the favorable opinion of the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4, may provide with their own allocations for the realization of works and interventions provided for by the basin plans, under the control of the aforementioned conference.
The provinces, the municipalities, the mountain communities, and the other public bodies, with the prior authorization of the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4, may contribute with their own allocations to the realization of works and interventions provided for by the basin plans.
Art. 70
Adoption of the programs
The intervention programs are adopted by the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4; these programs are sent to the components of the conference itself at least twenty days before the date set for the conference; in case of a majority decision, the deliberation of adoption must provide an adequate and analytical motivation with respect to the dissenting opinions expressed within the conference.
The deadline of each three-year program is set at December 31 of the last year of the three-year period and the sums authorized for the implementation of the program for the part possibly not yet committed at the aforementioned date are intended to increase the fund of the subsequent three-year program for the implementation of the interventions provided for by the current three-year program or its revision.
By December 31 of the penultimate year of the current three-year program, the new intervention programs relating to the subsequent three-year period, adopted according to the methods of paragraph 1, are transmitted to the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, so that, by the following June 3, on the basis of the forecasts contained in the programs and having heard the State-Regions Conference, he may transmit to the Minister of Economy and Finance the indication of the financial need for the subsequent three-year period, for the purposes of preparing the draft financial law.
The interventions provided for by the three-year programs are normally implemented in an integrated and coordinated manner by the competent subjects, on the basis of program agreements pursuant to Article 34 of Legislative Decree No. 267 of August 18, 2000.
Art. 71
Implementation of interventions
The study and design and technical-organizational functions attributed to the Basin Authorities can also be exercised through the assignment of tasks to university institutions, freelance professionals, or specialized technical-professional organizations, in conformity with specific directives issued by the Permanent Institutional Conference referred to in Article 63, paragraph 4.
The execution of prompt intervention works can have a definitive character when the urgency of the case requires it.
All concession acts for the implementation of interventions pursuant to this section are subject to registration at a fixed rate.
Art. 72
Financing
Without prejudice to the revenues connected with the maintenance and operation activities of hydraulic, reclamation, and land improvement works, the interventions provided for by this section are entirely borne by the State and are implemented through the three-year programs of Article 69.
For the purposes of paragraph 1, provision is made pursuant to Article 11, paragraph 3, letter d), of Law No. 468 of August 5, 1978. The aforementioned allocations are entered in the budget forecast of the Ministry of Economy and Finance until the completion of the allocation procedure of paragraphs 3 and 4 of this article, on the basis of which the Minister of Economy and Finance makes, with his own decree, the necessary budget variations.
The Committee of Ministers referred to in Article 57, after hearing the State-Regions Conference, prepares the draft national intervention program for the three-year period and the allocation of funds between the State Administrations and the regions, taking into account the priorities indicated in the individual programs and ensuring, where necessary, the coordination of the interventions. Against the total authorized allocation, the same Committee of Ministers proposes the amount of a reserve quota to be allocated to the financing of the programs for the functional, technical, and scientific adaptation and enhancement of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT).
The national intervention program and the allocation of funds, including the reserve quota in favor of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT), are approved by the President of the Council of Ministers, pursuant to Article 57.
The Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, within thirty days of the approval of the national three-year program, on the proposal of the State-Regions Conference, identifies with his own decree the works of regional competence, which have great technical-hydraulic importance for the modification of the main hydrographic network and of the water state property, whose projects must be submitted to the opinion of the Superior Council of Public Works, to be expressed within ninety days of the request.
SECTION II - PROTECTION OF WATERS FROM POLLUTION
TITLE I - GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND COMPETENCIES
Art. 73
Purposes
The provisions of this section define the general discipline for the protection of surface, marine, and groundwater, pursuing the following objectives:
a) to prevent and reduce pollution and to implement the remediation of polluted water bodies;
b) to achieve the improvement of the state of the waters and adequate protection of those intended for particular uses;
c) to pursue sustainable and durable uses of water resources, with priority for drinking water;
d) to maintain the natural self-purification capacity of water bodies, as well as the capacity to support ample and well-diversified animal and plant communities;
e) to mitigate the effects of floods and drought, thus contributing to:
guaranteeing a sufficient supply of good quality surface and groundwater for a sustainable, balanced, and equitable water use;
significantly reducing groundwater pollution;
protecting territorial and marine waters and achieving the objectives of international agreements on the matter, including those aimed at preventing and eliminating pollution of the marine environment, in order to stop or gradually eliminate discharges, emissions, and losses of priority hazardous substances with the ultimate aim of achieving concentrations in the marine environment close to background values for naturally occurring substances and close to zero for synthetic anthropogenic substances;
f) to prevent further deterioration, protect and improve the state of aquatic ecosystems, terrestrial ecosystems, and wetlands directly dependent on aquatic ecosystems in terms of their water needs.
The achievement of the objectives indicated in paragraph 1 is realized through the following instruments:
a) the identification of environmental quality objectives and for specific destination of water bodies;
b) the integrated protection of qualitative and quantitative aspects within each hydrographic district and an adequate system of controls and sanctions;
c) compliance with the limit values for discharges set by the State, as well as the definition of limit values in relation to the quality objectives of the receiving body;
d) the adaptation of sewerage, collection, and purification systems for water discharges, within the scope of the integrated water service;
e) the identification of measures for the prevention and reduction of pollution in vulnerable zones and sensitive areas;
f) the identification of measures aimed at the conservation, saving, reuse, and recycling of water resources;
g) the adoption of measures for the gradual reduction of discharges, emissions, and any other source of diffuse pollution containing hazardous substances or for their gradual elimination when containing priority hazardous substances, contributing to achieving concentrations in the marine environment close to background values for naturally occurring substances and close to zero for synthetic anthropogenic substances;
h) the adoption of measures to control discharges and emissions into surface waters according to a combined approach.
The pursuit of the purposes and the use of the instruments of paragraphs 1 and 2, within the financial resources provided by current legislation, contribute to protecting territorial and marine waters and to achieving the objectives of international agreements on the matter.
Art. 74
Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
a) population equivalent: the biodegradable organic load having a biochemical oxygen demand at 5 days (BOD5) equal to 60 grams of oxygen per day;
b) cyprinid waters: waters in which fish belonging to cyprinids (Cyprinidae) or species such as pike, perch, and eels live or can live;
c) coastal waters: surface waters located landward of an imaginary line, at every point, one nautical mile on the seaward side from the nearest point of the baseline from which the limit of territorial waters is defined and which extend, where appropriate, up to the outer limit of transitional waters;
d) salmonid waters: waters in which fish belonging to species such as trout, grayling, and whitefish live or can live;
e) estuary: the transitional area between fresh waters and coastal waters at the mouth of a river, whose external limits towards the sea are defined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea; on a transitional basis, these limits are set at five hundred meters from the coastline;
f) fresh waters: waters that occur in nature with a concentration of salts such as to be considered appropriate for extraction and treatment in order to produce drinking water;
g) domestic wastewater: wastewater from residential-type settlements and services and deriving mainly from human metabolism and domestic activities;
h) industrial wastewater: any type of wastewater from buildings or installations where commercial or production activities are carried out, qualitatively different from domestic wastewater and from meteoric runoff water, meaning also those that have come into contact with substances or materials, including pollutants, not connected with the activities carried out in the establishment;
i) urban wastewater: the mixture of domestic wastewater, industrial wastewater, and/or meteoric runoff water conveyed in sewerage networks, including separate ones, and originating from an agglomeration;
l) groundwater: all waters found below the surface of the ground, in the saturation zone and in direct contact with the soil and subsoil;
m) thermal waters: the natural mineral waters referred to in Article 2, paragraph 1, letter a), of Law No. 323 of October 24, 2000, used for the purposes permitted by the same law;
n) agglomeration: the area where the population, or productive activities, are concentrated to such an extent as to make it permissible, both technically and economically in relation to the environmental benefits that can be achieved, the collection and conveyance in a dynamic sewerage system of urban wastewater towards a treatment system or towards a final discharge point;
o) application to the land: the supply of material to the land through spreading and/or mixing with the surface layers, injection, burial;
p) agronomic use: the management of livestock effluents, vegetation water remaining from the processing of olives, wastewater from agricultural and small agri-food companies, from their production until application to the land;
q) area authority: the form of cooperation between municipalities and provinces for the organization of the integrated water service;
r) manager of the integrated water service: the subject who manages the integrated water service in an optimal territorial area or the existing public service manager only until the full operation of the integrated water service;
s) livestock: all animals raised for use or profit;
t) nitrogen compound: any substance containing nitrogen, excluding that in the gaseous molecular state;
u) chemical fertilizers: any fertilizer produced by an industrial process;
v) livestock effluent: the dejections of livestock or a mixture of litter and dejection of livestock, including in the form of a processed product, including effluents from fish farming activities;
z) eutrophication: enrichment of waters with nutrients, particularly compounds of nitrogen and/or phosphorus, which causes an abnormal proliferation of algae and/or higher forms of plant life, producing a disturbance to the balance of organisms present in the water and to the quality of the interested waters;
aa) fertilizer: without prejudice to the provisions of Law No. 748 of October 19, 1984, substances containing one or more nitrogen compounds, including livestock effluents, residues from fish farms, and sludge, spread on the ground to stimulate plant growth;
bb) sludge: residual sludge, treated or untreated, from urban wastewater treatment plants;
cc) pollution: the direct or indirect introduction, as a result of human activity, of substances or heat into the air, water, or land which may be harmful to human health or to the quality of aquatic ecosystems or terrestrial ecosystems that depend directly on aquatic ecosystems, causing disturbance, disfigurement, or deterioration of recreational values or other legitimate uses of the environment;
dd) sewerage network: the system of generally underground channels for the collection and conveyance of domestic, industrial, and urban wastewater to the final point of discharge;
ee) separate sewerage: the sewerage network consisting of two channels, the first of which is used for the collection and conveyance of only meteoric runoff waters, and equipped or not with devices for the collection and separation of first flush waters, and the second used for the collection and conveyance of urban wastewater together with any first flush waters;
ff) discharge: any emission of wastewater into surface waters, on the soil, in the subsoil, and in the sewerage network, regardless of its polluting nature, even if subjected to prior purification treatment. Releases of water provided for in Article 114 are excluded;
gg) discharge waters: all wastewater from a discharge;
hh) existing discharges: urban wastewater discharges that on June 13, 1999, were in operation and compliant with the previous authorization regime and discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants for which on the same date all procedures relating to tenders and the awarding of works had already been completed, as well as domestic wastewater discharges that on June 13, 1999, were in operation and compliant with the previous authorization regime and industrial wastewater discharges that on June 13, 1999, were in operation and already authorized;
ii) appropriate treatment: the treatment of urban wastewater through a process or a disposal system that, after discharge, guarantees the conformity of the receiving water bodies with their relative quality objectives or is compliant with the provisions of the third part of this decree;
ll) primary treatment: the treatment of wastewater that involves the sedimentation of suspended solids through physical and/or physico-chemical processes and/or others, following which before discharge the BOD5 of the treated waters is reduced by at least 20 percent and the total suspended solids by at least 50 percent;
mm) secondary treatment: the treatment of wastewater through a process that generally involves biological treatment with secondary sedimentation, or through another process in which the requirements of Table 1 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree are in any case met;
nn) industrial establishment, establishment: the entire area subject to the control of a single manager, in which commercial or industrial activities are carried out that involve the production, transformation, and/or use of the substances referred to in Annex 8 to the third part of this decree, or any other production process that involves the presence of such substances in the discharge;
oo) emission limit value: limit of acceptability of a polluting substance contained in a discharge, measured in concentration, or in mass per unit of product or raw material worked, or in mass per unit of time;
pp) vulnerable zones: areas of territory that discharge directly or indirectly nitrogen compounds of agricultural or zootechnical origin into waters already polluted or that could be so as a consequence of such types of discharges.
For the purposes of this section, it is also intended for:
a) surface waters: inland waters with the exception of groundwater, transitional waters, and coastal waters, except with regard to chemical status, in relation to which territorial waters are also included;
b) inland waters: all running or stagnant surface waters, and all groundwater landward of the baseline that serves as a reference for defining the limit of territorial waters;
c) river: an inland water body that flows mainly on the surface but may be partially underground;
d) lake: a stationary inland surface water body;
e) transitional waters: surface water bodies in the vicinity of a river mouth, which are partly saline in nature due to their proximity to coastal waters, but are substantially influenced by freshwater flows;
f) artificial water body: a surface water body created by human activity;
g) heavily modified water body: a surface water body whose nature, as a result of physical alterations due to human activity, is substantially modified, as resulting from its designation by the competent authority based on the provisions of Articles 118 and 120;
h) surface water body: a distinct and significant element of surface waters, such as a lake, an artificial basin, a torrent, river or canal, part of a torrent, river or canal, transitional waters or a stretch of coastal waters;
i) aquifer: one or more underground layers of rock or other geological strata of sufficient porosity and permeability to allow a significant flow of groundwater or the abstraction of significant quantities of groundwater;
l) groundwater body: a distinct volume of groundwater contained in one or more aquifers;
m) river basin: the territory in which all surface waters flow through a series of torrents, rivers, and possibly lakes to discharge into the sea at a single mouth, estuary, or delta;
n) sub-river basin: the territory in which all surface waters flow through a series of torrents, rivers, and lakes to discharge at a specific point of a watercourse, usually a lake or the confluence of a river;
o) river basin district: the area of land and sea, consisting of one or more neighboring river basins and their respective groundwater and coastal waters, which constitutes the main unit for the management of river basins;
p) status of surface waters: the overall expression of the status of a surface water body, determined by the lower value of its ecological and chemical status;
q) good status of surface waters: the status reached by a surface water body if its status, both in ecological and chemical terms, can be defined as at least "good";
r) status of groundwater: the overall expression of the status of a groundwater body, determined by the lower value of its quantitative and chemical status;
s) good status of groundwater: the status reached by a groundwater body if its status, both in quantitative and chemical terms, can be defined as at least "good";
t) ecological status: the expression of the quality of the structure and functioning of aquatic ecosystems associated with surface waters, classified according to Annex 1 to the third part of this decree;
u) good ecological status: the status of a surface water body classified according to Annex 1 to the third part of this decree;
v) good ecological potential: the status of an artificial or heavily modified water body, so classified according to the relevant provisions of Annex 1 to the third part of this decree;
z) good chemical status of surface waters: the chemical status required to achieve the environmental objectives for surface waters set by this, i.e., the status reached by a surface water body in which the concentration of known pollutants exceeds the environmental quality standards set in Annex 1 to the third part of this decree, Table 1/A and pursuant to the third part of this decree;
aa) good chemical status of groundwater: the chemical status of a groundwater body that meets all the conditions set out in Table B.3.2 of Annex 1 to the third part of this decree;
bb) quantitative status: the expression of the degree to which a groundwater body is modified by direct and indirect abstractions;
cc) available groundwater resources: the result of the long-term average annual rate of global replenishment of the groundwater body minus the long-term average annual rate of flow necessary to achieve the ecological quality objectives for connected surface waters, as per Article 76, in order to avoid a significant impoverishment of the ecological status of such waters, as well as significant damage to connected terrestrial ecosystems;
dd) good quantitative status: status defined in Table B.1.2 of Annex 1 to the third part of this decree;
ee) hazardous substances: substances or groups of substances that are toxic, persistent, and bio-accumulative, and other substances or groups of substances that give rise to analogous concerns;
ff) priority substances and priority hazardous substances: the substances identified with community provisions pursuant to Article 16 of Directive 2000/60/EC;
gg) pollutant: any substance that may cause pollution, in particular those listed in Annex 8 to the third part of this decree;
hh) direct discharge into groundwater: the discharge of pollutants into groundwater without infiltration through the soil or subsoil;
ii) environmental objectives: the objectives set by Title II of the third part of this decree;
ll) environmental quality standard: the concentration of a particular pollutant or group of pollutants in water, sediment, and biota that should not be exceeded to protect human health and the environment;
mm) combined approach: the set of controls, to be established or implemented, unless otherwise indicated by the regulations cited below, by December 22, 2012, concerning all discharges into surface waters, including controls on emissions based on the best available techniques, those on the relevant emission limit values and, in the case of diffuse impacts, and those including, eventually, the best environmental practices; these controls are those established:
in Legislative Decree No. 59 of February 18, 2005, on the integrated prevention and reduction of pollution;
in the third part of this decree regarding urban wastewater, nitrates from agricultural sources, substances that present significant risks for the aquatic environment or through the aquatic environment, including risks for waters intended for the production of drinking water and discharges of Hg, Cd, HCH, DDT, PCP, aldrin, dieldrin, endrin, HCB, HCBD, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, EDC, trichloroethylene, TCB and perchlorethylene;
nn) waters intended for human consumption: the waters regulated by Legislative Decree No. 31 of February 2, 2001;
oo) water services: all services that provide for families, public bodies, or any economic activity:
abstraction, damming, storage, treatment, and distribution of surface or groundwater,
facilities for the collection and treatment of wastewater, which subsequently discharge into surface waters;
pp) water use: water services together with other uses resulting from the cognitive activity of Article 118 that significantly affect the status of the waters. This notion applies for the purposes of the economic analysis of Annex 10 to the third part of this decree;
qq) emission limit values: the mass expressed in relation to certain specific parameters, the concentration and/or level of an emission that must not be exceeded in one or more periods of time. Emission limit values can also be set for certain groups, families, or categories of substances. The emission limit values for substances normally apply at the point where the emissions leave the plant, without taking into account any dilution; for indirect discharges into water, the effect of a wastewater treatment plant can be taken into consideration in determining the emission limit values of the plant, provided that an equivalent level of protection of the environment as a whole is guaranteed and that this does not lead to higher pollution loads in the environment;
rr) emission controls: controls that involve a specific limitation of emissions, for example an emission limit value, or that otherwise define limits or conditions on the effects, nature, or other characteristics of an emission or operating conditions that influence emissions;
ss) environmental costs: the costs linked to the damages that the use of water resources itself causes to the environment, ecosystems, and those who use the environment;
tt) resource costs: the costs of missed opportunities imposed on other users as a consequence of the intensive exploitation of resources beyond their level of restoration and natural replacement;
uu) plant: the permanent technical unit in which one or more activities listed in Annex I of Legislative Decree No. 59 of February 18, 2005, and any other ancillary activity, which are technically connected with the activities carried out in a establishment and may have an effect on emissions and pollution, are carried out; in the case of activities not falling within the scope of Legislative Decree No. 59 of February 18, 2005, the plant is identified in the establishment. In the case of activities referred to in Annex I of the aforementioned decree, the plant is identified with the complex subject to the discipline of integrated prevention and control of pollution.


Art. 75
Competencies
In the matters regulated by the provisions of this section:
a) the State exercises the competencies assigned to it for the protection of the environment and the ecosystem through the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, without prejudice to the competencies in hygienic-sanitary matters assigned to the Minister of Health;
b) the regions and local authorities exercise the functions and tasks assigned to them within the framework of their constitutionally determined competencies and in compliance with state attributions.
With reference to the functions and tasks assigned to the regions and local authorities, in case of ascertained inactivity that involves non-fulfillment of the obligations deriving from membership of the European Union, danger of serious prejudice to health or the environment, or non-compliance with information obligations, the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea for the matter, assigns the defaulting entity a suitable term to provide, after which, if it has passed uselessly, the Council of Ministers, having heard the defaulting subject, appoints a commissioner who provides in a substitute capacity. The economic charges connected with the substitution activity are borne by the defaulting entity. The ordinance powers provided for by the legal system in case of urgent necessity and the provisions on substitute powers provided for by current legislation, as well as the provisions of Article 132, remain firm.
The technical prescriptions necessary for the implementation of the third part of this decree are established in the Annexes to the decree itself and with one or more regulations adopted pursuant to Article 17, paragraph 3, of Law No. 400 of August 23, 1988, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea after agreement with the State-Regions Conference; through the same regulations, the Annexes to the third part of this decree can also be modified to adapt them to subsequent needs or to new scientific or technological acquisitions.
By decree of the competent Ministers for the matter, provision is made for the modification of the Annexes to the third part of this decree to give effect to the directives that will be issued by the European Union, for the parts in which they modify executive and technical order characteristics of the European Union directives implemented by the third part of this decree, according to what is provided for by Article 13 of Law No. 11 of February 4, 2005.
The regions ensure the widest dissemination of information on the state of water quality and transmit to the Department for the protection of inland and marine waters of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT) the cognitive data and information relating to the implementation of the third part of this decree, as well as those prescribed by community discipline, according to the methods indicated by decree of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, in concert with the competent Ministers, in agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano. The Department for the protection of inland and marine waters of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT) processes at a national level, within the National Environmental Information System (SINA), the information received and transmits it to the interested Ministries and to the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea also for sending to the European Commission. With the same decree, the cases in which the regions are required to transmit to the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea the measures adopted for the purposes of communications to the European Union or by reason of assumed international obligations are identified and regulated.
The regions favor the active participation of all interested parties in the implementation of the third part of this decree, in particular in the phase of elaboration, revision, and updating of the protection plans of Article 121.
The regions provide so that the quality objectives of Articles 76 and 77 and the relative programs of measures are pursued in the water bodies falling within the international hydrographic basins in implementation of agreements between the interested member states, availing themselves for this purpose of existing structures resulting from international agreements.
If the hydrographic district exceeds the borders of the European Community, the State and the regions exercise their own competencies by working to establish an adequate coordination with the third countries involved, in order to achieve the objectives of the third part of this decree throughout the hydrographic district.
The land reclamation and irrigation consortia, also through specific program agreements with the competent authorities, contribute to the realization of actions of environmental safeguarding and restoration of waters also for the purpose of their irrigation use, the renaturalization of watercourses and phytodepuration.
TITLE II - QUALITY OBJECTIVES
CHAPTER I - ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY OBJECTIVE AND QUALITY OBJECTIVE FOR SPECIFIC DESTINATION
Art. 76
General provisions
For the purpose of the protection and remediation of surface and groundwater, the third part of this decree identifies the minimum environmental quality objectives for significant water bodies and the quality objectives for specific destination for the water bodies referred to in Article 78, to be guaranteed throughout the national territory.
The environmental quality objective is defined as a function of the capacity of water bodies to maintain the natural processes of self-purification and to support ample and well-diversified animal and plant communities.
The quality objective for specific destination identifies the state of the water bodies suitable for a particular use by man, for the life of fish and mollusks.
In implementation of the third part of this decree, measures are adopted, through the water protection plan of Article 121, to achieve the following objectives by December 22, 2015;
a) that the environmental quality objective corresponding to the "good" state be maintained or achieved for significant surface and groundwater bodies;
b) that the "high" state of environmental quality, as defined in Annex 1 to the third part of this decree, be maintained where it already exists;
c) that the quality objectives for specific destination of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree, except for the terms of fulfillment provided for by the previous regulations, also be maintained or achieved for the water bodies for specific destination referred to in Article 79.
If for a water body environmental quality objectives and for specific destination are designated that provide for different limit values for the same parameters, the most cautious ones must be respected when they refer to the achievement of the environmental quality objective; the obligation to respect these values starts from December 22, 2015.
The protection plan provides for the coordination of environmental quality objectives with the various quality objectives for specific destination.
The regions can define higher environmental quality objectives, as well as identify further destinations of water bodies and related quality objectives.
Art. 77
Identification and pursuit of the environmental quality objective
Within twelve months from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, on the basis of the data already acquired and the results of the first survey carried out pursuant to Articles 118 and 120, the regions that have not done so identify for each significant water body, or part of it, the quality class corresponding to one of those indicated in Annex 1 to the third part of this decree.
In relation to the classification of paragraph 1, the regions establish and adopt the necessary measures for the achievement or maintenance of the environmental quality objectives of Article 76, paragraph 4, letters a) and b), taking into account the maximum admissible load, where fixed on the basis of the indications of the Basin Authorities, and ensuring in any case for all water bodies the adoption of measures suitable to prevent further degradation.
In order to ensure by December 22, 2015, the achievement of the environmental quality objective corresponding to the "good" state, by December 31, 2008, each classified surface water body or stretch thereof must achieve at least the requirements of the "sufficient" state of Annex 1 to the third part of this decree.
The waters falling within the protected areas must comply with the objectives and quality standards set in Annex 1 to the third part of this decree, according to the time schedules established therein, unless otherwise provided by the sector legislation under which the individual areas were established.
The designation of an artificial or heavily modified water body and the relative motivation are explicitly mentioned in the basin plans and are reviewed every six years. The regions can define an artificial or heavily modified water body when:
a) the modifications of the hydromorphological characteristics of that body, necessary for the achievement of a good ecological status, have significant negative consequences:
on the environment in a broad sense;
on navigation, including port infrastructures, or on leisure boating;
on activities for which water is accumulated, such as the supply of drinking water, the production of energy, or irrigation;
on water regulation, protection from floods, or agricultural drainage;
on other sustainable human development activities equally important;
b) the advantages for which the artificial or modified characteristics of the water body are intended cannot, for reasons of technical feasibility or due to disproportionate costs, be achieved with other means that represent a significantly better option on the environmental plan.
The regions can with reason establish different terms for water bodies that present conditions such as not to allow the achievement of the "good" state by December 22, 2015, in compliance with what is established in paragraph 9 and provided that at least one of the following reasons exists:
a) the scope of the necessary improvements can be implemented, for reasons of technical feasibility, only in phases that exceed the established period;
b) the completion of the improvements within the established terms would be disproportionately expensive;
c) the natural conditions do not allow improvements in the state of the water body in the required times.
The regions can with reason establish less stringent environmental quality objectives for certain water bodies, if at least one of the following conditions occurs:
a) the water body has undergone, as a consequence of human activity, serious repercussions that make a significant improvement of the qualitative state manifestly impossible or economically unsustainable;
b) the achievement of the planned quality objective is not achievable due to the lithological or geomorphological nature of the basin of belonging.
When the conditions of paragraph 7 occur, the definition of less stringent objectives is allowed provided that they do not lead to the further deterioration of the state of the water body and, without prejudice to the case of letter b) of the same paragraph 7, provided that the achievement of the objectives set by the third part of this decree in other water bodies included in the same hydrographic basin is not prejudiced.
In the cases provided for by paragraphs 6 and 7, the protection plans must include measures for the protection of the water body, including supplementary or restrictive provisions of the discipline of discharges or water uses. The times and objectives, as well as the relative measures, are reviewed at least every six years and any modification must be inserted as an update of the plan.
The temporary deterioration of the state of the water body due to natural circumstances or exceptional and reasonably unforeseeable force majeure, such as violent floods and prolonged droughts, or consequent to reasonably unforeseeable incidents, does not constitute a violation of the prescriptions of the third part of this decree, provided that all the following conditions are met:
a) that all measures are taken to prevent the further deterioration of the quality status of the water bodies and the compromise of the achievement of the objectives of Article 76 and of this article in other water bodies not interested by the circumstance;
b) that the protection plan expressly provides for the situations in which said events can be declared reasonably unforeseeable or exceptional, also by adopting the appropriate indicators;
c) that appropriate measures are provided for and adopted so as not to compromise the restoration of the quality of the water body once the events in question have concluded;
d) that the effects of exceptional or unforeseeable events are subject to an annual review and, subject to the reasons of Article 76, paragraph 4, letter a), everything possible is done to restore the water body to the state preceding such events as soon as this is reasonably feasible;
e) that a summary of the effects of the events and of the measures adopted or to be adopted is inserted in the subsequent update of the protection plan.
Art. 78
Quality standards for the aquatic environment
For the purposes of the protection of surface waters from pollution caused by hazardous substances, the significant water bodies of Article 76 must comply by December 31, 2008, with the quality standards reported in Table 1/A of Annex 1 to the third part of this decree, the discipline of which replaces for all purposes that of the ministerial decree of November 6, 2003, no. 367.
The water protection plans of Article 121 contain the instruments for the achievement of the standards of paragraph 1, also for the purposes of managing the sludge deriving from purification plants and the discipline of discharges.
By decree of the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, the provision of Article 16 of Directive 2000/60/EC is implemented by December 31, 2015. Within the same terms, the waters for specific destination of Article 79 must comply with the standards set by the same decree.
Art. 79
Quality objective for specific destination
Waters for specific functional destination are:
a) fresh surface waters intended for the production of drinking water;
b) waters intended for bathing;
c) fresh waters that require protection and improvement to be suitable for the life of fish;
d) waters intended for the life of mollusks.
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 76, paragraphs 4 and 5, for the waters indicated in paragraph 1, the quality objective for specific destination established in Annex 2 to the third part of this decree is pursued for each use, with the exception of bathing waters.
The regions, for the purpose of a constant improvement of the water environment, establish programs, which are incorporated into the protection plan, to maintain or adapt the quality of the waters of paragraph 1 to the quality objective for specific destination. The regions prepare a specific list, periodically updated, of the waters of paragraph 1.
CHAPTER II - WATERS FOR SPECIFIC DESTINATION
Art. 80
Surface waters intended for the production of drinking water
Fresh surface waters, to be used or intended for the production of drinking water, are classified by the regions into categories A1, A2, and A3, according to the physical, chemical, and microbiological characteristics of Table 1/A of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree.
Depending on the category of belonging, the fresh surface waters of paragraph 1 are subjected to the following treatments:
a) Category A1: simple physical treatment and disinfection;
b) Category A2: normal physical and chemical treatment and disinfection;
c) Category A3: advanced physical and chemical treatment, refining, and disinfection.
The regions send the data relating to the monitoring and classification of the waters of paragraphs 1 and 2 to the Ministry of Health, which provides for their subsequent transmission to the European Commission.
Fresh surface waters that present physical, chemical, and microbiological characteristics qualitatively inferior to the mandatory limit values of category A3 may be used, exceptionally, only if it is not possible to resort to other sources of supply and provided that the waters are subjected to appropriate treatment that allows compliance with the quality standards of the waters intended for human consumption.
Art. 81
Derogations
For surface waters intended for the production of drinking water, the regions may derogate from the values of the parameters of Table 1/A of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree:
a) in case of floods or natural disasters;
b) limited to the parameters marked in Annex 2 to the third part of this decree, Table 1/A, with the symbol (o), if exceptional meteorological circumstances or particular geographical conditions occur;
c) when the surface waters are naturally enriched with certain substances exceeding the values set for categories A1, A2, and A3;
d) in the case of lakes that have a depth not exceeding 20 meters, that take more than a year to renew their waters and into which no wastewater is discharged, limited to the parameters marked in Annex 2 to the third part of this decree, Table 1/A, by an asterisk (*).
The derogations of paragraph 1 are not permitted if they result in a concrete danger to public health.
Art. 82
Waters used for the abstraction of drinking water
Without prejudice to the provisions for fresh surface waters intended for the production of drinking water, the regions, within the hydrographic district of belonging, identify:
a) all surface and groundwater bodies that provide on average more than 10 m3 per day or serve more than 50 people, and
b) the water bodies intended for such future use.
The competent authority provides for the monitoring, according to Annex 1 to the third part of this decree, of the water bodies that provide on average more than 100 m3 per day.
For the water bodies of paragraph 1, the environmental objective of Articles 76 and following must be achieved.
Art. 83
Bathing waters
The waters intended for bathing must meet the requirements of the Decree of the President of the Republic No. 470 of June 8, 1982.
For the waters that are still not suitable for bathing pursuant to the decree of paragraph 1, the regions communicate to the Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, before the beginning of the bathing season subsequent to the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree and, subsequently, with annual periodicity before the beginning of the bathing season, all information relating to the causes of non-bathability and the measures they intend to adopt, according to the methods indicated by the decree of Article 75, paragraph 6.
Art. 84
Fresh waters suitable for fish life
The regions carry out the designation of fresh waters that require protection or improvement to be suitable for the life of fish. For the purposes of this designation, priority is given to:
a) the watercourses that cross the territory of national parks and state nature reserves as well as regional parks and nature reserves;
b) the natural and artificial lakes, ponds and other water bodies, located in the aforementioned territorial areas;
c) the fresh surface waters included in the wetlands declared "of international importance" pursuant to the Ramsar Convention of February 2, 1971, made executive with the Decree of the President of the Republic No. 448 of March 13, 1976, on the protection of wetlands, as well as those included in the "fauna protection oases", established by the regions and autonomous provinces pursuant to Law No. 157 of February 11, 1992;
d) the fresh surface waters which, although not included in the preceding categories, present a significant scientific, naturalistic, environmental, and productive interest as they constitute habitats of rare or endangered animal or plant species, or as the site of complex aquatic ecosystems worthy of conservation or, also, the site of ancient and traditional forms of fish production that present a high degree of ecological and economic sustainability.
The regions, within fifteen months of the designation, classify the fresh surface waters that present quality parameter values conforming with the mandatory ones provided for in Table 1/B of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree as "salmonid" or "cyprinid" fresh waters.
The designation and classification of paragraphs 1 and 2 must be gradually extended to cover the entire water body, without prejudice to the possibility of designating and classifying, within the same, some stretches as "salmonid water" and some stretches as "cyprinid water". The designation and classification are subject to revision in relation to unforeseen or supervening elements.
If required by exceptional and urgent needs for the protection of the quality of fresh waters suitable for fish life, the President of the Regional Council or the President of the Provincial Council, within their respective competencies, adopt specific and motivated measures, supplementary or restrictive of the discharges or uses of the waters.
Fresh surface waters of natural or artificial basins used for the intensive farming of fish species as well as artificial canals used for multiple purposes, drainage, or irrigation, and those specifically built for the removal of sewage and industrial wastewater are excluded from the application of this article and Articles 85 and 86.
Art. 85
Assessment of the quality of waters suitable for fish life
The waters designated and classified pursuant to Article 84 are considered suitable for fish life if they meet the requirements reported in Table 1/B of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree.
If from the samplings it results that one or more values of the parameters reported in Table 1/B of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree are not respected, the competent control authorities ascertain whether the non-observance is due to natural phenomena, to force majeure, to polluting inputs or to excessive abstractions, and propose to the competent authority the appropriate measures.
For the purposes of a more complete evaluation of the quality of the waters, the regions promote the realization of suitable biological analysis programs of the designated and classified waters.
Art. 86
Derogations
For fresh surface waters designated or classified to be suitable for fish life, the regions may derogate from the respect of the parameters indicated in Table 1/B of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree with the symbol (o) in case of exceptional meteorological circumstances or special geographical conditions and, as regards the respect of the parameters reported in the same Table, in case of natural enrichment of the water body with substances coming from the soil without direct intervention of man.
Art. 87
Waters intended for shellfish life
The regions, in agreement with the Ministry of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, designate, within the coastal and brackish marine waters that are the site of beds and natural populations of bivalve and gastropod mollusks, those requiring protection and improvement to allow their life and development and to contribute to the good quality of molluscan products directly edible by man.
The regions may proceed with complementary designations, or with the revision of the designations already made, as a function of the existence of unforeseen elements at the time of designation.
If required by exceptional and urgent needs for the protection of the quality of waters intended for shellfish life, the President of the Regional Council, the President of the Provincial Council, and the Mayor, within their respective competencies, adopt specific and motivated measures, supplementary or restrictive of the discharges or uses of the waters.
Art. 88
Assessment of the quality of waters intended for shellfish life
The waters designated pursuant to Article 87 must meet the quality requirements of Table 1/C of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree. Otherwise, the regions establish programs to reduce their pollution.
If from a sampling it results that one or more values of the parameters of Table 1/C of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree are not respected, the competent control authorities ascertain whether the non-observance is due to natural phenomena, to force majeure or to other factors of pollution and the regions adopt appropriate measures.
Art. 89
Derogations
For waters intended for shellfish life, the regions may derogate from the requirements of Table 1/C of Annex 2 to the third part of this decree in case of exceptional meteorological or geomorphological conditions.
Art. 90
Sanitary regulations
The activities of Articles 87, 88, and 89 do not prejudice the implementation of the sanitary regulations relating to the classification of the production and stabulation zones of live bivalve mollusks, carried out pursuant to Legislative Decree No. 530 of December 30, 1992.
TITLE III - PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES AND DISCIPLINE OF DISCHARGES
CHAPTER I - AREAS REQUIRING SPECIFIC MEASURES OF PREVENTION FROM POLLUTION AND OF REMEDIATION
Art. 91
Sensitive areas
Sensitive areas are identified according to the criteria of Annex 6 to the third part of this decree. The following are in any case sensitive areas:
a) the lakes of Annex 6 to the third part of this decree, as well as the watercourses afferent to them for a stretch of 10 kilometers from the coastline;
b) the lagoon areas of Orbetello, Ravenna, and Piallassa-Baiona, the Valli di Comacchio, the salt lakes, and the Po delta;
c) the wetlands identified pursuant to the Ramsar Convention of February 2, 1971, made executive with the decree of the President of the Republic No. 448 of March 13, 1976;
d) the coastal areas of the North-West Adriatic from the mouth of the Adige to the southern border of the municipality of Pesaro and the watercourses afferent to them for a stretch of 10 kilometers from the coastline;
e) Lake Garda and Lake Idro;
f) the rivers Sarca-Mincio, Oglio, Adda, Lambro-Olona meridionale, and Ticino;
g) the river Arno downstream of Florence and its relative tributaries;
h) the Gulf of Castellammare in Sicily;
i) the coastal waters of the northern Adriatic.
The Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, after hearing the State-Regions Conference, within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, identifies with his own decree further sensitive areas identified according to the criteria of Annex 6 to the third part of this decree.
What is provided by the current legislation regarding the protection of Venice remains firm.
The regions, on the basis of the criteria of paragraph 1 and after hearing the Basin Authority, within one year from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, and subsequently every two years, may designate further sensitive areas or identify within the areas indicated in paragraph 2 the water bodies that do not constitute sensitive areas.
The regions, on the basis of the criteria of paragraph 1 and after hearing the Basin Authority, delimit the draining basins in the sensitive areas that contribute to the pollution of such areas.
The Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea provides with his own decree, to be issued every four years from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, after hearing the State-Regions Conference, for the re-identification of the sensitive areas and their respective draining basins that contribute to the pollution of the sensitive areas.
The new sensitive areas identified pursuant to paragraphs 2, 4, and 6 must meet the requirements of Article 106 within seven years of identification.
The discharges discharging into the draining basins afferent to the sensitive areas of paragraphs 2 and 6 are subject to the provisions of Article 106.

**Art. 92**
**Vulnerable zones from nitrates of agricultural origin**
1. Vulnerable zones are identified according to the criteria of Annex 7/A-I to the third part of this decree.
2. For the purposes of the first identification, the areas listed in Annex 7/A-III to the third part of this decree are designated as vulnerable zones.
3. To take into account changes and/or unforeseen factors at the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, after four years from that date, the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea with his own decree, after hearing the State-Regions Conference, may modify the criteria of paragraph 1.
4. Within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, on the basis of the available data and taking into account the indications established in Annex 7/A-I to the third part of this decree, the regions, after hearing the Basin Authorities, may identify further vulnerable zones or, within the zones indicated in Annex 7/A-III to the third part of this decree, the parts that do not constitute vulnerable zones.
5. To take into account changes and/or unforeseen factors at the time of the previous designation, at least every four years the regions, after hearing the Basin Authorities, may review or complete the designations of vulnerable zones. To this end, the regions prepare and implement, every four years, a monitoring program to verify the concentrations of nitrates in fresh waters for a period of one year, according to the prescriptions of Annex 7/A-I to the third part of this decree, as well as re-examine the eutrophic state caused by nitrogen of surface fresh waters, transitional waters, and coastal marine waters.
6. In the zones identified pursuant to paragraphs 2, 4, and 5, the action programs of paragraph 7 must be implemented, as well as the prescriptions contained in the code of good agricultural practice of the decree of the Minister for Agricultural and Forestry Policies of April 19, 1999, published in the Ordinary Supplement to the Official Gazette no. 102 of May 4, 1999.
7. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree for the zones designated pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 4, and within one year from the date of designation for the further zones of paragraph 5, the regions, on the basis of the indications and measures of Annex 7/A-IV to the third part of this decree, define, or review if already in place, the mandatory action programs for the protection and remediation of waters from pollution caused by nitrates of agricultural origin, and provide for their implementation in the following year for the vulnerable zones of paragraphs 2 and 4 and in the subsequent four years for the zones of paragraph 5.
8. The regions also provide for:
a) integrating, where appropriate, in relation to local needs, the code of good agricultural practice, establishing its application methods;
b) preparing and implementing training and information interventions for farmers on the action program and on the code of good agricultural practice;
c) elaborating and applying, within four years from the definition or revision of the programs of paragraph 7, the necessary control and verification tools of the effectiveness of the programs themselves on the basis of the results obtained; where necessary, modifying or integrating such programs by identifying, among the further possible measures, the most effective ones, taking into account the implementation costs of the measures themselves.
9. The variations made to the designations, the action programs, the results of the verifications of their effectiveness, and the revisions carried out are communicated to the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, according to the methods indicated in the decree of Article 75, paragraph 6. The Minister for Agricultural and Forestry Policies is given timely notice of the integrations made to the code of good agricultural practice of paragraph 8, letter a), as well as of the training and information interventions.
10. In order to guarantee a general level of protection of the waters, the application of the code of good agricultural practice is recommended also outside the vulnerable zones.

**Art. 93**
**Vulnerable zones from plant protection products and zones vulnerable to desertification**
1. With the methods provided for by Article 92, and on the basis of the indications contained in Annex 7/B to the third part of this decree, the regions identify the areas vulnerable to plant protection products according to the criteria of Article 5, paragraph 21, of Legislative Decree No. 194 of March 17, 1995, for the purpose of protecting water resources or other environmental compartments from the pollution deriving from the use of plant protection products.
2. The regions and the Basin Authorities verify the presence in the territory of competence of areas subject to or threatened by phenomena of drought, soil degradation, and desertification processes and designate them as areas vulnerable to desertification.
3. For the areas of paragraph 2, within the district planning and its implementation, specific protection measures are adopted, according to the criteria provided for in the national action plan of the CIPE deliberation of December 22, 1998, published in the Official Gazette no. 39 of February 17, 1999.

**Art. 94**
**Discipline of the safeguard areas of surface and groundwater intended for human consumption**
1. On the proposal of the Area Authorities, the regions, to maintain and improve the qualitative characteristics of the surface and groundwater intended for human consumption, supplied to third parties through an aqueduct system that has the character of public interest, as well as for the protection of the state of the resources, identify the safeguard areas divided into an absolute protection zone and a respect zone, as well as, within the catchment basins and the aquifer recharge areas, the protection zones.
2. For supplies other than those of paragraph 1, the competent Authorities issue, on a case-by-case basis, the necessary prescriptions for the conservation and protection of the resource and for the control of the qualitative characteristics of the waters intended for human consumption.
3. The absolute protection zone is constituted by the area immediately surrounding the catchments or derivations: it, in the case of groundwater and, where possible, for surface waters, must have an extension of at least ten meters radius from the point of capture, must be adequately protected and must be used exclusively for capture or intake works and for service infrastructures.
4. The respect zone is constituted by the portion of territory surrounding the absolute protection zone to be subjected to constraints and uses such as to qualitatively and quantitatively protect the captured water resource and can be divided into a narrow respect zone and a wider respect zone, in relation to the typology of the intake or capture work and to the local situation of vulnerability and risk of the resource. In particular, in the respect zone, the settlement of the following danger centers and the carrying out of the following activities are prohibited:
a) dispersion of sludge and wastewater, even if purified;
b) accumulation of chemical fertilizers, fertilizers, or pesticides;
c) spreading of chemical fertilizers, fertilizers, or pesticides, unless the use of such substances is carried out on the basis of the indications of a specific utilization plan that takes into account the nature of the soils, the compatible crops, the agronomic techniques used, and the vulnerability of the water resources;
d) dispersion in the subsoil of meteoric water from squares and roads;
e) cemetery areas;
f) opening of quarries that may be in connection with the aquifer;
g) opening of wells with the exception of those that extract waters intended for human consumption and those aimed at varying the extraction and protecting the qualitative-quantitative characteristics of the water resource;
h) waste management;
i) storage of products or dangerous chemical substances and radioactive substances;
l) collection, demolition, and scrapping centers for motor vehicles;
m) soakaways;
n) grazing and stabling of livestock that exceeds 170 kilograms per hectare of nitrogen present in the effluents, net of storage and distribution losses. The stabling of livestock in the narrow respect zone is in any case prohibited.
5. For the pre-existing settlements or activities of paragraph 4, where possible, and in any case with the exception of cemetery areas, measures are taken for their removal; in any case, their securing must be guaranteed. Within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the regions and autonomous provinces regulate, within the respect zones, the following structures or activities:
a) sewerage;
b) residential building and related urbanization works;
c) road, railway, and in general service infrastructure works;
d) agronomic practices and contents of the utilization plans of letter c) of paragraph 4.
6. In the absence of identification by the regions or autonomous provinces of the respect zone pursuant to paragraph 1, the same has an extension of 200 meters radius from the point of capture or derivation.
7. The protection zones must be delimited according to the indications of the regions or autonomous provinces to ensure the protection of the water heritage. In them, measures can be adopted relating to the destination of the interested territory, limitations, and prescriptions for civil, productive, tourist, agro-forestry, and zootechnical settlements to be inserted in the municipal, provincial, regional urban planning instruments, both general and sectoral.
8. For the purposes of the protection of groundwater, including that not yet used for human use, the regions and autonomous provinces identify and regulate, within the protection zones, the following areas:
a) aquifer recharge areas;
b) natural and artificial emergencies of the aquifer;
c) reserve zones.

**CHAPTER II - QUANTITATIVE PROTECTION OF THE RESOURCE AND WATER SAVING**

**Art. 95**
**Water balance planning**
1. The quantitative protection of the resource contributes to the achievement of quality objectives through a planning of water uses aimed at avoiding repercussions on their quality and allowing a sustainable water consumption.
2. In the protection plans, measures are adopted aimed at ensuring the equilibrium of the water balance as defined by the Basin Authorities, in compliance with the priorities established by the current legislation and taking into account the needs, availability, minimum vital flow, aquifer recharge capacity, and uses of the resource compatible with its relative qualitative and quantitative characteristics.
3. Within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the regions define, on the basis of the guidelines adopted by the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea with his own decree, after agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, as well as on the basis of the criteria already adopted by the Basin Authorities, the obligations of installation and maintenance in regular working order of suitable devices for measuring the flow rates and volumes of public water derived, at the points of withdrawal and, where present, of restitution, as well as the obligations and methods of transmission of the results of the measurements to the granting Authority for their subsequent forwarding to the region and the competent Basin Authorities. The Basin Authorities provide for the transmission of the data in their possession to the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT) according to the methods of Article 75, paragraph 6.
4. Without prejudice to what is provided for in paragraph 5, all water derivations in any case in progress at the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree are regulated by the granting Authority through the provision of releases aimed at guaranteeing the minimum vital flow in the water bodies, as defined according to the criteria adopted by the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea with a specific decree, after agreement with the State-Regions Conference, without this giving rise to the payment of indemnities by the public administration, without prejudice to the relative reduction of the state concession fee.
5. For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the granting Authorities carry out a census of all uses in progress in the same water body on the basis of the criteria adopted by the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea with his own decree, after agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano; the same Authorities subsequently provide, where necessary, for the revision of this census, ordering prescriptions or temporal or quantitative limitations, without this giving rise to the payment of indemnities by the public administration, without prejudice to the relative reduction of the state concession fee.
6. In the preferential concession provision, issued pursuant to Article 4 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, the prescriptions relating to the releases aimed at guaranteeing the minimum vital flow in the water bodies as well as the necessary prescriptions to ensure the equilibrium of the water balance are contained.

**Art. 96**
**Modifications to Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933**
1. The second paragraph of Article 7 of the single text of the provisions on waters and electric plants, approved with Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, is replaced by the following: [....].
2. Paragraphs 1 and 1-bis of Article 9 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, are replaced by the following: [....].
3. Article 12-bis of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, is replaced by the following: [....].
4. Article 17 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, is replaced by the following: [....].
5. The second paragraph of Article 54 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, already repealed by Article 23 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of May 11, 1999, remains repealed.
6. Without prejudice to what is provided for in paragraph 7, for the derivations or uses of public water wholly or partly abusively in progress, the presentation of a request for a regularizing concession is permitted by June 30, 2006, after payment of the sanction of Article 17 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, increased by one fifth. After this date, Article 17, paragraph 3, of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, applies to the derivations or uses of public water wholly or partly abusively in progress. The regularizing concession is issued in compliance with the current legislation and the regularly granted uses. Pending the preliminary procedure of the regularizing concession, the use may continue without prejudice to the obligation to pay the fee for the use made and the power of the granting authority to suspend the use at any time if in conflict with the rights of third parties or with the achievement or maintenance of the quality objectives and the equilibrium of the water balance. The provisions of Article 95, paragraph 5, remain firm in any case.
7. The terms within which to assert, under penalty of forfeiture, pursuant to Articles 3 and 4 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, the right to the recognition or concession of waters that have assumed a public nature pursuant to Article 1, paragraph 1 of Law No. 36 of January 5, 1994, as well as for the presentation of the reports of the wells pursuant to Article 10 of Legislative Decree No. 275 of July 12, 1993, are extended to December 31, 2007*. In such cases, the state fees are due from August 10, 1999. In the preferential concession provision, the prescriptions relating to the releases aimed at guaranteeing the minimum vital flow in the water bodies and those necessary prescriptions to ensure the equilibrium of the water balance are contained.
8. The first paragraph of Article 21 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, is replaced by the following: [....].
9. After the third paragraph of Article 21 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, the following is inserted: [....].
10. Without prejudice to the effectiveness of the more restrictive norms, the entire national territory is subject to protection pursuant to Article 94 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933.
11. The regions regulate the procedures for the release of concessions for the derivation of public waters in compliance with the directives on the management of the water state property in which the possibilities of free use of surface waters draining on soils or in private property channels are also indicated. The regions, after hearing the Basin Authorities, regulate forms of regulation of groundwater abstractions for domestic uses, as defined by Article 93 of Royal Decree No. 1775 of December 11, 1933, where it is necessary to guarantee the equilibrium of the water balance.
*Note: the original term of June 30, 2006, has been so extended by effect of art. 2, c. 1 of D.L. no. 300 of December 28, 2006 - cd. "Decreto milleproroghe" (G.U. no. 300 of 28/12/2006), as modified during conversion into L. no. 17/2007 (G.U. no. 47 of 26.2.2007, S.O. no. 48).

**Art. 97**
**Natural mineral and spring waters**
1. The concessions for the use of natural mineral waters and spring waters are issued taking into account the needs of supply and distribution of drinking waters and the provisions of the protection plan of Article 121.

**Art. 98**
**Water saving**
1. Those who manage or use the water resource adopt the necessary measures for the elimination of waste and the reduction of consumption and to increase recycling and reuse, also through the use of the best available techniques.
2. The regions, after hearing the Basin Authorities, approve specific norms on water saving in agriculture, based on the planning of uses, on the correct identification of needs in the sector, and on the controls of the actual abstractions.

**Art. 99**
**Reuse of water**
1. The Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea with his own decree, after hearing the Ministers of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, of Health, and of Productive Activities, dictates the technical norms for the reuse of wastewater.
2. The regions, in compliance with the principles of state legislation, and after hearing the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), adopt norms and measures aimed at promoting the recycling of water and the reuse of purified wastewater.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**CHAPTER III - QUALITATIVE PROTECTION OF THE RESOURCE: DISCIPLINE OF DISCHARGES**

**Art. 100**
**Sewerage networks**
1. Agglomerations with a number of population equivalents greater than 2,000 must be provided with sewerage networks for urban wastewater.
2. The design, construction, and maintenance of the sewerage networks are carried out by adopting the best available techniques and that involve economically admissible costs, taking into account, in particular:
a) of the average flow rate, the annual volume, and the characteristics of the urban wastewater;
b) of the prevention of any backflow phenomena that involve the outflow of wastewater from the sewer sections;
c) of the limitation of the pollution of the receiving bodies, caused by overflows originating from particular meteorological events.
3. For isolated settlements, installations, or buildings that produce domestic wastewater, the regions identify individual systems or other adequate public or private systems that achieve the same level of environmental protection, indicating the times for the adaptation of the discharges to said systems.

**Art. 101**
**General criteria of the discipline of discharges**
1. All discharges are regulated according to the respect of the quality objectives of the water bodies and must in any case respect the limit values provided for in Annex 5 to the third part of this decree. The authorization can in any case establish specific derogations from the aforementioned limits and suitable prescriptions for the start-up and shutdown periods and for the eventuality of breakdowns as well as for the further transitional periods necessary for the return to regime conditions.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the regions, in the exercise of their autonomy, taking into account the maximum admissible loads and the best available techniques, define the emission limit values, different from those of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, both in maximum admissible concentration and in maximum quantity per unit of time in order to each polluting substance and for groups or families of similar substances. The regions cannot establish less restrictive limit values than those set in Annex 5 to the third part of this decree:
a) in Table 1, relative to the discharge of urban wastewater into surface water bodies;
b) in Table 2, relative to the discharge of urban wastewater into surface water bodies falling in sensitive areas;
c) in Table 3/A, for the production cycles indicated therein;
d) in Tables 3 and 4, for those substances indicated in Table 5 of the same Annex.
3. All discharges, with the exception of domestic ones and those assimilated to them pursuant to paragraph 7, letter e), must be made accessible for sampling by the competent control authority at the point assumed as a reference for sampling, which, without prejudice to what is provided for in Article 108, paragraph 4, must be carried out immediately upstream of the discharge into the receiving body in all natural watercourses, surface and groundwater, internal and marine, sewers, on the soil and in the subsoil.
4. The competent control authority is authorized to carry out all the inspections it deems necessary to ascertain the conditions that give rise to the formation of the discharges. It may request that partial discharges containing the substances of numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15, 16, 17, and 18 of Table 5 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree undergo a particular treatment before their confluence into the general discharge.
5. The emission limit values cannot in any case be achieved through dilution with waters taken exclusively for this purpose. It is in any case not permitted to dilute with cooling, washing, or waters taken exclusively for the purpose the partial discharges of paragraph 4, before their treatment to adapt them to the limits provided for by the third part of this decree. The competent authority, in the authorization phase, may prescribe that the discharge of cooling, washing waters, or waters used for the production of energy be separated from the terminal discharge of each establishment.
6. If the waters taken from a surface water body present parameters with values higher than the emission limit values, the discipline of the discharge is established on the basis of the nature of the alterations and the quality objectives of the receiving water body. In any case, the waters must be returned with qualitative characteristics not worse than those taken and without increases in flow rate to the same water body from which they were taken.
7. Without prejudice to what is provided for in Article 112, for the purposes of the discipline of discharges and authorizations, the following wastewater is assimilated to domestic wastewater:
a) from companies dedicated exclusively to the cultivation of the land and/or forestry;
b) from companies dedicated to livestock breeding that, as regards livestock effluents, practice agronomic use in conformity with the regional discipline established on the basis of the criteria and general technical norms of Article 112, paragraph 2, and that have at least one hectare of agricultural land for each of the quantities indicated in Table 6 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree;
c) from companies dedicated to the activities of letters a) and b) that also exercise transformation or enhancement activities of agricultural production, inserted with a character of normality and functional complementarity in the company's production cycle and with raw material coming mainly from the cultivation activity of the land of which one has availability for any reason;
d) from aquaculture and fish farming plants that give rise to a discharge and that are characterized by a breeding density equal to or less than 1 kg per square meter of water surface or in which a water flow rate equal to or less than 50 liters per minute second is used;
e) having qualitative characteristics equivalent to domestic ones and indicated by the regional regulations;
f) from thermal activities, without prejudice to the regional sector disciplines.
8. Within six months from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, and subsequently every two years, the regions transmit to the Minister of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea, to the Geological Survey of Italy - Soil Protection Department of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT), and to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) the information relating to the functionality of the purifiers, as well as to the disposal of the relative sludge, according to the methods of Article 75, paragraph 5.
9. In order to ensure the widest dissemination of information on the state of the environment, the regions publish every two years, on their Official Bulletins and institutional internet sites, a report on the urban wastewater disposal activities in their areas of competence, according to the methods indicated in the decree of Article 75, paragraph 5.
10. The competent Authorities may promote and stipulate program agreements and contracts with interested economic subjects, in order to favor water saving, the reuse of discharge waters, and the recovery as raw material of the purification sludge, with the possibility of resorting to economic instruments, of establishing simplifications in administrative fulfilments and of setting, for the substances considered useful, limits on discharges in derogation of the general discipline, in any case respecting the community norms and the necessary measures for the achievement of the quality objectives.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 102**
**Discharges of thermal waters**
1. For thermal waters that present at the origin chemical parameters with values higher than the emission limit values, a derogation from the same values is permitted provided that the waters are returned with qualitative characteristics not higher than those taken or that the same, within the maximum of 10 percent, respect the bacteriological parameters and the hazardous substances of Tables 3/A and 5 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree are not present.
2. Thermal discharges are permitted, without prejudice to the discipline of the authorizations adopted by the regions pursuant to Article 124, paragraph 5:
a) in surface water bodies, provided that their discharge into the receiving body does not compromise the uses of the water resources and does not cause damage to health and the environment;
b) on the soil or in the surface layers of the subsoil, after verification of the geological situations;
c) in sewerage networks, provided that the regulations issued by the manager of the integrated water service are observed and they are authorized by the Area Authorities;
d) in separate sewerage networks provided for meteoric waters.

**Art. 103**
**Discharges on the soil**
1. It is forbidden to discharge on the soil or in the surface layers of the subsoil, with the exception of:
a) for the cases provided for by Article 100, paragraph 3;
b) for the overflow spillways serving the sewerage networks;
c) for the discharges of urban and industrial wastewater for which the technical impossibility or excessive costliness, in the face of the achievable environmental benefits, to discharge into surface water bodies is ascertained, provided that the same comply with the criteria and emission limit values set for this purpose by the regions pursuant to Article 101, paragraph 2. Until the issuance of new regional norms, the emission limit values of Table 4 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree apply;
d) for the discharges of waters from the processing of natural rocks as well as from the plants for washing mineral substances, provided that the relative sludge consists exclusively of water and natural inerts and does not cause damage to the aquifers or instability of the soils;
e) for the discharges of meteoric waters conveyed in separate sewerage networks;
f) for the waters deriving from the overflow of water reservoirs, from the maintenance operations of the water supply networks, and from the maintenance of the aqueduct wells.
2. Outside the hypotheses provided for in paragraph 1, the existing discharges on the soil must be conveyed into surface water bodies, in sewerage networks, or destined for reuse in conformity with the prescriptions set with the decree of Article 99, paragraph 1. In case of non-fulfillment of the indicated obligations, the authorization for discharge is considered for all effects revoked.
3. The discharges of letter c) of paragraph 1 must comply with the limits of Table 4 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree. The prohibition of discharge on the soil of the substances indicated at point 2.1 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree remains firm in any case.

**Art. 104**
**Discharges into the subsoil and groundwater**
1. Direct discharge into groundwater and the subsoil is prohibited.
2. By way of derogation from the provisions of paragraph 1, the competent authority, after a preliminary investigation, may authorize discharges into the same aquifer of water used for geothermal purposes, infiltration water from mines or quarries, or water pumped during specific civil engineering works, including those from heat exchange systems.
3. By way of derogation from the provisions of paragraph 1, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in agreement with the Minister of Productive Activities for offshore deposits and also with the regions for onshore deposits, may also authorize the discharge of water resulting from the extraction of hydrocarbons into the deep geological units from which the hydrocarbons themselves were extracted, or into units with the same characteristics, which contain or have contained hydrocarbons, indicating the discharge methods. The discharge must not contain other wastewater or other hazardous substances, different in quality and quantity, from those derived from the separation of hydrocarbons. The relevant authorizations are issued with the prescription of the necessary technical precautions to ensure that the discharged water cannot reach other water systems or harm other ecosystems.
4. By way of derogation from the provisions of paragraph 1, the competent authority, after a preliminary investigation also aimed at verifying the absence of foreign substances, may authorize discharges into the same aquifer of water used for the washing and processing of inert materials, provided that the relative sludge consists exclusively of water and natural inert materials and their discharge does not cause damage to the aquifer. To this end, the regionally competent Regional Agency for Environmental Protection (ARPA), at the expense of the subject requesting the authorization, shall ascertain the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the sludge and the absence of possible damage to the aquifer, expressing a binding opinion on the request for discharge authorization.
5. For the activities of prospecting, exploration, and extraction of liquid or gaseous hydrocarbons at sea, the direct discharge of water into the sea shall occur according to the methods provided for by the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea by his own decree, provided that the concentration of mineral oils is less than 40 mg/l. The direct discharge into the sea is progressively replaced by injection or reinjection into deep geological units, as soon as no longer productive wells suitable for injection or reinjection become available, and must in any case occur in compliance with the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3.
6. The Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, when authorizing discharge into deep geological units as per paragraph 3, also authorizes direct discharge into the sea, according to the methods provided for in paragraphs 5 and 7, for the following cases:
a) for the fraction of excess water, if the capacity of the injector or reinjector well is not sufficient to guarantee the reception of all the water resulting from the extraction of hydrocarbons;
b) for the time necessary to carry out ordinary and extraordinary maintenance, aimed at guaranteeing the correct functionality and safety of the system consisting of the well and the injection or reinjection plant.
7. The direct discharge into the sea of the waters referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6 is authorized upon presentation of a monitoring plan aimed at verifying the absence of dangers for the water and for the aquatic ecosystems.
8. Apart from the cases provided for in paragraphs 2, 3, 5, and 7, existing and duly authorized discharges into the subsoil and groundwater must be conveyed into surface water bodies or destined, where possible, for recycling, reuse, or agronomic utilization. In case of non-compliance with the indicated obligations, the discharge authorization is revoked.

**Art. 105**
**Discharges into surface waters**
1. Discharges of industrial wastewater into surface waters must comply with the emission limit values set pursuant to Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2, as a function of the pursuit of quality objectives.
2. Discharges of urban wastewater that flow into sewerage networks, originating from agglomerations with fewer than 2,000 population equivalents and discharging into freshwaters and transitional waters, and discharges from agglomerations with fewer than 10,000 population equivalents, discharging into marine-coastal waters, are subject to appropriate treatment, in accordance with the indications of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree.
3. Urban wastewater must be subjected, before discharge, to secondary treatment or an equivalent treatment in accordance with the indications of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree.
4. The discharges provided for in paragraph 3 must also comply with the emission limit values set pursuant to Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2.
5. The regions shall issue specific regulations for the discharges from sewerage networks originating from agglomerations with high seasonal fluctuation of inhabitants, taking into account the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 and without prejudice to the achievement of quality objectives.
6. Discharges of urban wastewater into waters located in high mountain areas, i.e., above 1500 meters above sea level, where, due to low temperatures, it is difficult to carry out effective biological treatment, may be subjected to a less advanced treatment than that provided for in paragraph 3, provided that specific studies prove that the said discharges will not have negative repercussions on the environment.

**Art. 106**
**Discharges of urban wastewater into water bodies located in sensitive areas**
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2, urban wastewater from agglomerations with more than 10,000 population equivalents, which discharges into receiving waters identified as sensitive areas, must be subjected to a more advanced treatment than that provided for in Article 105, paragraph 3, according to the specific requirements indicated in Annex 5 to the third part of this decree.
2. The provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply in sensitive areas where it can be demonstrated that the minimum percentage of reduction of the total load entering all urban wastewater treatment plants is at least seventy-five percent for total phosphorus or at least seventy-five percent for total nitrogen.
3. The regions shall identify, among the discharges from urban wastewater treatment plants located within the drainage basins afferent to sensitive areas, those which, by contributing to the pollution of such areas, are to be subjected to the treatment referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 in function of achieving the quality objective of the receiving water bodies.

**Art. 107**
**Discharges into sewerage networks**
1. Without prejudice to the non-derogability of the emission limit values referred to in table 3/A of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree and, limited to the parameters referred to in note 2 of Table 5 of the same Annex 5, to Table 3, discharges of industrial wastewater that discharge into sewerage networks are subject to the technical standards, regulatory requirements, and limit values adopted by the competent Area Authority based on the characteristics of the plant, and in such a way as to ensure the protection of the receiving water body as well as compliance with the regulations for discharges of urban wastewater defined pursuant to Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2.
2. Discharges of domestic wastewater that discharge into sewerage networks are always permitted provided they comply with the regulations issued by the manager of the integrated water service and approved by the competent Area Authority.
3. The disposal of waste, even if shredded, into the sewer system is not permitted, with the exception of organic waste from food scraps, mixed with water from civil uses, treated through the installation, previously communicated to the manager of the integrated water service, of food waste disposers that reduce its mass into fine particles, after a technical check of the plants and networks by the manager of the integrated water service who is responsible for the proper functioning of the system.
4. The regions, having heard the provinces, may establish supplementary rules for the control of discharges from civil and productive settlements connected to public sewers, for the functionality of pretreatment plants, and for compliance with the limits and prescriptions provided for in the relevant authorizations.

**Art. 108**
**Discharges of hazardous substances**
1. The provisions relating to the discharge of hazardous substances apply to establishments in which activities are carried out that involve the production, transformation, or use of the substances referred to in Tables 3/A and 5 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, and in whose discharges the presence of such substances is ascertained in quantities or concentrations exceeding the limits of detectability permitted by the detection methods in force on the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, or, subsequently, exceeding the limits of detectability permitted by the updates to such methods developed pursuant to point 4 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree.
2. Taking into account the toxicity, persistence, and bioaccumulation of the substance considered in the environment where the discharge is made, the competent authority, when issuing the authorization, may set, in cases where it is ascertained that the limit values defined pursuant to Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2, prevent or prejudice the achievement of the quality objectives provided for in the protection plan referred to in Article 121, also due to the co-presence of other discharges of hazardous substances, emission limit values more restrictive than those set pursuant to Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2.
3. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 107 and paragraph 2 of this article, the prescriptions concerning the discharges of companies subject to the provisions of Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005 must be implemented by 30 October 2007. These prescriptions, concerning emission limit values, parameters, and technical measures, are based on the best available techniques, without the obligation to use a specific technique or technology, taking into account the technical characteristics of the plant in question, its geographical location, and the local environmental conditions.
4. For the substances referred to in Table 3/A of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, deriving from the production cycles indicated in the same table, the authorizations shall also establish the maximum quantity of the substance expressed in units of weight per unit of characteristic element of the polluting activity, that is, per raw material or per unit of product, in accordance with what is indicated in the same Table. Discharges containing the hazardous substances referred to in paragraph 1 are subject to the prescriptions of point 1.2.3. of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree.
5. For industrial wastewater containing the substances of Table 5 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, the discharge measurement point is fixed as provided for by the integrated environmental authorization of Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005, and, in the case of activities not falling within the scope of the aforementioned decree, immediately after leaving the establishment or the treatment plant that serves the establishment itself. The competent authority may request that partial discharges containing the substances of table 5 of the same Annex 5 be kept separate from the general discharge and regulated as waste. If the industrial wastewater treatment plant that treats the hazardous substances, referred to in table 5 of the same Annex 5, receives wastewater containing hazardous substances not sensitive to the type of treatment adopted, the competent authority, during authorization, will appropriately reduce the emission limit values indicated in table 3 of the same Annex 5 for each of the aforesaid hazardous substances indicated in Table 5, taking into account the dilution caused by the mixing of the different wastewaters.
6. The authority competent to issue the authorization for the substances referred to in Table 3/A of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, deriving from the production cycles indicated in the same table, shall draw up a list of the authorizations issued, of the existing discharges, and of the checks carried out, for the purpose of their subsequent forwarding to the European Commission.

**CHAPTER IV - FURTHER MEASURES FOR THE PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES**

**Art. 109**
**Dumping at sea of material from dredging and from the laying of cables and pipelines**
1. For the purpose of protecting the marine environment and in accordance with the provisions of international conventions in force on the matter, the deliberate dumping into the sea from ships or aircraft and from structures located in the waters of the sea or in areas contiguous to it, such as beaches, lagoons and brackish ponds and coastal embankments, of the following materials is permitted:
a) materials from the dredging of marine or brackish seabeds or of emerged coastal lands;
b) inert materials, inorganic geological materials, and manufactured articles for the sole purpose of use, where their compatibility and environmental harmlessness are demonstrated;
c) organic and inorganic material of marine or brackish origin, produced during fishing activities carried out in the sea or lagoon or brackish ponds.
2. Authorization for the dumping at sea of the materials referred to in paragraph 1, letter a), is issued by the competent authority only when, within the relevant preliminary investigation, the technical or economic impossibility of their use for beach nourishment or recovery or of their alternative disposal in accordance with the methods established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Infrastructure and Transport, of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, of Productive Activities, after agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, to be issued within one hundred and twenty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, is demonstrated.
3. The dumping at sea of material referred to in paragraph 1, letter b), is subject to authorization, with the exclusion of new manufactured articles subject to environmental impact assessment. For restoration works, which do not involve an increase in the volume of pre-existing works, only communication to the competent authority is required.
4. The dumping at sea of the materials referred to in paragraph 1, letter c), is not subject to authorization.
5. The movement of the seabed resulting from the activity of laying cables and pipelines at sea is subject to regional authorization issued in accordance with the technical methods established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Productive Activities, of Infrastructure and Transport and of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, for their respective competencies, to be issued within one hundred and twenty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree. In the case of pipelines or cables that are part of energy networks of national interest, or for connection with energy networks of other states, the authorization is issued by the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, after consulting the interested regions, within the single authorization procedure for the networks themselves.

**Art. 110**
**Treatment of waste at urban wastewater treatment plants**
1. Except as provided in paragraphs 2 and 3, the use of urban wastewater treatment plants for the disposal of waste is prohibited.
2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the competent authority, in agreement with the Area Authority, in relation to particular needs and within the limits of the residual treatment capacity, may authorize the manager of the integrated water service to dispose of liquid waste in the urban wastewater treatment plant, limited to types compatible with the purification process.
3. The manager of the integrated water service, upon communication to the competent authority pursuant to Article 124, is in any case authorized to accept in plants with adequate characteristics and purification capacity, which respect the limit values referred to in Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2, the following waste and materials, provided they originate from its own optimal territorial area or from another optimal territorial area lacking adequate plants:
a) waste consisting of wastewater that respects the limit values established for discharge into the sewer system;
b) waste consisting of material from the ordinary maintenance of domestic wastewater treatment systems provided for under Article 100, paragraph 3;
c) materials deriving from the ordinary maintenance of the sewerage network as well as those deriving from other urban wastewater treatment plants, in which the further treatment of the same is not technically and/or economically feasible.
4. The activity referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 may be permitted provided that the possible reuse of the wastewater and sludge is not compromised.
5. In the communication provided for in paragraph 3, the manager of the integrated water service must indicate the residual capacity of the plant and the characteristics and quantities of the waste he intends to treat. The competent authority may indicate different quantities or prohibit the treatment of specific categories of waste. The competent authority shall also provide for the registration in special lists of the managers of treatment plants who have made the communication referred to in paragraph 3.
6. For the disposal of the waste referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3, the specific tariff determined by the Area Authority applies.
7. The producer and the transporter of the waste are required to comply with the legislation on waste, with the exception of the producer of the waste referred to in paragraph 3, letter b), who is required to comply only with the obligations provided for producers by the current legislation on waste. The manager of the integrated water service who, pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 5, treats waste is subject to the obligation to keep the loading and unloading register as provided for by the current legislation on waste.

**Art. 111**
**Aquaculture and fish farming plants**
1. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, of Infrastructure and Transport, and of Productive Activities, and after agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, the criteria relating to the containment of the environmental impact deriving from aquaculture and fish farming activities are identified.

**Art. 112**
**Agronomic use**
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 92 for vulnerable zones and of Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005, for intensive livestock farming plants referred to in point 6.6 of ANNEX 1 to the aforementioned decree, the agronomic use of livestock effluents, of the vegetation water from olive mills, on the basis of the provisions of Law No. 574 of 11 November 1996, as well as of wastewater from the farms referred to in Article 101, paragraph 7, letters a), b), and c), and from small agri-food businesses, as identified by the decree of the Minister of Agricultural and Forestry Policies referred to in paragraph 2, is subject to communication to the competent authority pursuant to Article 75 of this decree.
2. The regions regulate the agronomic use activities referred to in paragraph 1 on the basis of the criteria and general technical standards adopted by decree of the Minister of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, in concert with the Ministers of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, of Productive Activities, of Health, and of Infrastructure and Transport, in agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the aforementioned ministerial decree, while guaranteeing the protection of potentially affected water bodies and in particular the achievement or maintenance of the quality objectives referred to in the third part of this decree.
3. Within the framework of the regulations referred to in paragraph 2, the following are specifically regulated:
a) the methods of implementation of Articles 3, 5, 6, and 9 of Law No. 574 of 11 November 1996;
b) the times and methods for making the communication, providing for simplified procedures as well as specific cases of exemption from the obligation of communication for activities of minor environmental impact;
c) the technical standards for carrying out agronomic use operations;
d) the criteria and control procedures, including those relating to the imposition of prescriptions by the competent authority, the prohibition of exercise, or the temporary suspension of the activity referred to in paragraph 1 in case of non-communication or non-compliance with the technical standards and the prescriptions imposed;
e) the pecuniary administrative sanctions, without prejudice to the provisions of Article 137, paragraph 15.

**Art. 113**
**Stormwater runoff and first flush waters**
1. For the purposes of preventing hydraulic and environmental risks, the regions, after obtaining the opinion of the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, regulate and implement:
a) the forms of control of discharges of stormwater runoff from separate sewerage networks;
b) the cases in which it may be required that the discharge of stormwater runoff, carried out through other separate conduits, be subject to specific prescriptions, including possible authorization.
2. Stormwater not regulated pursuant to paragraph 1 is not subject to constraints or prescriptions deriving from the third part of this decree.
3. The regions also regulate the cases in which it may be required that first flush waters and waters for washing external areas be conveyed and appropriately treated in purification plants for particular conditions in which, in relation to the activities carried out, there is a risk of runoff from uncovered impermeable surfaces of hazardous substances or substances that create prejudice for the achievement of the quality objectives of the water bodies.
4. The discharge or direct release of stormwater into groundwater is in any case prohibited.

**Art. 114**
**Dams**
1. The regions, after obtaining the opinion of the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, shall adopt specific regulations concerning the restitution of water used for hydroelectric production, for irrigation purposes and in drinking water treatment plants, as well as water from surveys or drillings other than those related to the exploration and extraction of hydrocarbons, in order to ensure the maintenance or achievement of the quality objectives referred to in Title II of the third part of this decree.
2. In order to ensure the maintenance of the reservoir capacity and to safeguard both the quality of the impounded water and the receiving body, the desilting, flushing, and scouring operations of dams are carried out on the basis of a management plan for each reservoir. The management plan is aimed at defining both the forecast framework of said operations connected with the maintenance activities to be performed on the plant, and the prevention and protection measures for the receiving body, the aquatic ecosystem, fishing activities, and the water resources impounded and released downstream of the reservoir during the operations themselves.
3. The management plan also identifies any maneuvering methods of the discharge organs, also for the purpose of ensuring the protection of the receiving body. In any case, the provisions set by the Decree of the President of the Republic No. 1363 of 1 November 1959, aimed at guaranteeing the safety of people and property, remain valid.
4. The management plan is prepared by the operator on the basis of the criteria established by decree of the Minister of Infrastructure and Transport and of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities and with that of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, after agreement with the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, to be issued within one hundred and twenty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree.
5. The management plan is approved by the regions, with any prescriptions, within six months of its presentation, after obtaining the opinion of the administration responsible for supervising the safety of the reservoir and the dam, pursuant to Articles 89 and 91 of Legislative Decree No. 112 of 31 March 1998, and after consulting, where necessary, the managing bodies of the directly affected protected areas; for the dams referred to in the cited Article 91 of Legislative Decree No. 112 of 31 March 1998, the approved project is transmitted to the Italian Dams Register (RID) for insertion, also in synthetic form, as an integral part of the conditions sheet for the exercise and maintenance referred to in Article 6 of the Decree of the President of the Republic No. 1363 of 1 November 1959, and related implementing provisions. The management plan is considered approved and becomes operational six months after the date of presentation without any pronouncement from the competent region, without prejudice to the power of said Entities to issue any prescriptions, even after that deadline has passed.
6. With the approval of the project, the operator is authorized to carry out desilting, flushing, and scouring operations in accordance with the limits indicated in the project itself and with the related prescriptions.
7. In defining the concession fees for inert materials, the administrations shall determine specific methods and amounts to encourage the flushing and scouring of reservoirs by mechanical removal.
8. The operators of existing reservoirs, who have not yet complied with the obligations provided for by the decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea of 30 June 2004, published in the Official Gazette no. 269 of 16 November 2004, are required to present the project referred to in paragraph 2 within six months of the issuance of the decree referred to in paragraph 4. Until the approval or operation of the management project, and in any case no later than twelve months from the date of entry into force of the aforementioned decree, the periodic maneuvering operations prescribed pursuant to Article 17 of the Decree of the President of the Republic No. 1363 of 1 November 1959, aimed at checking the functionality of the discharge organs, are carried out in accordance with the condition sheets for exercise and maintenance.
9. The desilting, flushing, and scouring operations of the reservoirs must not prejudice the uses in progress downstream of the reservoir, nor the respect for the environmental quality objectives and the quality objectives for specific destination.

**Art. 115**
**Protection of areas appurtenant to water bodies**
1. In order to ensure the maintenance or restoration of spontaneous vegetation in the strip immediately adjacent to water bodies, with functions of filtering for suspended solids and pollutants of diffuse origin, of stabilizing the banks and of conserving biodiversity to be balanced with the needs of channel functionality, within one year from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree the regions regulate the interventions of transformation and management of the soil and subsoil provided for in the strip of at least 10 meters from the bank of rivers, lakes, ponds, and lagoons, in any case prohibiting the covering of watercourses that is not imposed by reasons of protection of public safety and the realization of waste disposal plants.
2. The interventions referred to in paragraph 1 are in any case subject to the authorization provided for by Royal Decree No. 523 of 25 July 1904, except as provided for interventions to safeguard public safety.
3. To guarantee the purposes of paragraph 1, the state-owned areas of rivers, torrents, lakes and other waters can be given in concession for the purpose of dedicating them to natural reserves, river or lake parks or in any case to restoration and environmental recovery interventions. If the state-owned areas are already included in state or regional protected natural areas included in the official list provided for by the current legislation, the concession is free of charge.
4. The areas of newly formed fluvial state property pursuant to Law No. 37 of 5 January 1994, cannot be subject to de-accession from state property.

**Art. 116**
**Programs of measures**
1. The regions, within the limits of available resources, shall integrate the Protection Plans referred to in Article 121 with the programs of measures consisting of the basic measures referred to in Annex 11 to the third part of this decree and, where necessary, of the supplementary measures referred to in the same Annex; these programs of measures are submitted for approval to the Basin Authority. If the measures are not sufficient to guarantee the achievement of the planned objectives, the Basin Authority shall identify the causes and indicate to the regions the methods for reviewing the programs, inviting them to make the necessary changes, without prejudice to the limit constituted by the available resources. The basic and supplementary measures must in any case be such as to avoid any increase in pollution of marine and surface waters. The programs are approved by 2009 and implemented by the regions by 2012; the subsequent review must take place by 2015 and must be updated every six years.

**TITLE IV - INSTRUMENTS OF PROTECTION**

**CHAPTER I - MANAGEMENT PLANS AND WATER PROTECTION PLANS**

**Art. 117**
**Management plans and register of protected areas**
1. For each hydrographic district, a Management Plan is adopted, which represents an internal articulation of the district basin plan referred to in Article 65. The Management Plan therefore constitutes a sectoral plan of the basin plan and is adopted and approved according to the procedures established for the latter by Article 66. The Basin Authorities, for the purposes of preparing the Management Plans, must guarantee the participation of all competent institutional subjects in the specific sector.
2. The Management Plan is composed of the elements indicated in part A of Annex 4 to the third part of this decree.
3. The Basin Authority, having heard the Area Authorities of the integrated water service, establishes within six months from the date of entry into force of this regulation, on the basis of the information transmitted by the regions, a register of the protected areas referred to in Annex 9 to the third part of this decree, designated by the competent authorities pursuant to the current legislation.

**Art. 118**
**Survey of the characteristics of the river basin and analysis of the impact exerted by anthropic activity**
1. In order to update the information necessary for the drafting of the Protection Plan referred to in Article 121, the regions shall implement specific data survey programs useful for describing the characteristics of the river basin and for evaluating the anthropic impact exerted on it, as well as for the collection of the data necessary for the economic analysis of the use of water, as provided for in Annex 10 to the third part of this decree. The results of the above activities are transmitted to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and to the Department for the protection of inland and marine waters of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT).
2. The programs referred to in paragraph 1 are adopted in accordance with the indications of Annex 3 to the third part of this decree and with the provisions adopted by a specific decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and are updated every six years.
3. In carrying out the cognitive activity referred to in paragraph 1, the regions are required to use the data and information already acquired.

**Art. 119**
**Principle of cost recovery for water services**
1. For the purpose of achieving the quality objectives of Chapter I of Title II of the third part of this decree, the competent Authorities shall take into account the principle of cost recovery of water services, including environmental and resource-related ones, taking into consideration the economic analysis carried out on the basis of Annex 10 to the third part of this decree and, in particular, according to the "polluter pays" principle.
2. By 2010, the competent Authorities shall implement water pricing policies suitable to adequately incentivize users to use water resources efficiently and to contribute to the achievement and maintenance of the environmental quality objectives referred to in Directive 2000/60/EC as well as in Articles 76 and following of this decree, including through an adequate contribution to the cost recovery of water services from the various water use sectors, divided at least into industry, households, and agriculture. In this regard, the social, environmental, and economic repercussions of the recovery of the aforementioned costs, as well as the geographical and climatic conditions of the region or regions in question, must in any case be taken into account. In particular:
a) the concession fees for the derivations of public waters shall take into account the environmental costs and the resource costs associated with the use of water;
b) the tariffs of water services charged to the various water use sectors, such as civil, industrial, and agricultural, shall contribute adequately to the cost recovery on the basis of the economic analysis carried out according to Annex 10 to the third part of this decree.
3. In the Protection Plans referred to in Article 121, the phases planned for the implementation of the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 necessary for the achievement of the quality objectives of the third part of this decree are reported.

**Art. 120**
**Survey of the quality status of water bodies**
1. The regions shall prepare and implement programs for the knowledge and verification of the qualitative and quantitative status of surface and groundwater within each river basin.
2. The programs referred to in paragraph 1 are adopted in accordance with the indications of Annex 1 to the third part of this decree. These programs must be integrated with those already existing for the objectives for specific destination established in accordance with Annex 2 to the third part of this decree, as well as with those of the waters included in the register of protected areas. The results of the activities referred to in paragraph 1 are transmitted to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and to the Department for the protection of inland and marine waters of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT).
3. In order to avoid overlaps and to guarantee the flow of the information collected and its compatibility with the National Environmental Information System (SINA), the regions may promote, in the exercise of their respective competencies, program agreements with the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT), the regional agencies for environmental protection referred to in decree-law no. 496 of 4 December 1993, converted, with modifications, by law no. 61 of 21 January 1994, the provinces, the Area Authorities, the consortia for land reclamation and irrigation, and the other interested public bodies. The programs must also define the methods for data standardization and information exchange.

**Art. 121**
**Water protection plans**
1. The Water Protection Plan constitutes a specific sectoral plan and is articulated according to the contents listed in this article, as well as according to the specifications indicated in part B of Annex 4 to the third part of this decree.
2. By 31 December 2006, the Basin Authorities, in the context of planning activities or through specific acts of guidance and coordination, having heard the provinces and the Area Authorities, shall define the objectives on a district scale to which the water protection plans must adhere, as well as the priorities of the interventions. By 31 December 2007, the regions, having heard the provinces and after adopting any safeguard measures, shall adopt the Water Protection Plan and transmit it to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea as well as to the competent Basin Authorities, for verification of competence.
3. The Protection Plan contains, in addition to the interventions aimed at guaranteeing the achievement or maintenance of the objectives referred to in the third part of this decree, the necessary measures for the qualitative and quantitative protection of the water system.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Protection Plan contains in particular:
a) the results of the cognitive activity;
b) the identification of the environmental quality objectives and for specific destination;
c) the list of water bodies for specific destination and of the areas requiring specific measures for the prevention of pollution and for remediation;
d) the qualitative and quantitative protection measures, integrated and coordinated among themselves by river basin;
e) the indication of the temporal frequency of the interventions and their relative priorities;
f) the program for verifying the effectiveness of the planned interventions;
g) the remediation interventions of the water bodies;
h) the economic analysis referred to in Annex 10 to the third part of this decree and the measures planned in order to implement the provisions of Article 119 concerning the cost recovery of water services;
i) the financial resources provided for by the current legislation.
5. Within one hundred and twenty days of the transmission of the Protection Plan, the Basin Authorities shall verify the conformity of the plan with the planning acts or with the acts of guidance and coordination referred to in paragraph 2, expressing a binding opinion. The Protection Plan is approved by the regions within the subsequent six months and in any case no later than 31 December 2008. The subsequent revisions and updates must be carried out every six years.

**Art. 122**
**Public information and consultation**
1. The regions promote the active participation of all interested parties in the implementation of the third part of this decree, in particular in the elaboration, review, and updating of the Protection Plans. Upon motivated request, the regions authorize access to the reference documents and information on the basis of which the draft of the Protection Plan was prepared. The regions shall ensure that, for the territory of competence falling within the respective hydrographic district, the following are published and made available for any observations by the public:
a) the calendar and work program for the presentation of the Plan, including a declaration of the consultative measures to be taken at least three years before the start of the period to which the Plan refers;
b) a provisional global assessment of the priority problems for the management of water within the respective hydrographic basin, at least two years before the start of the period to which the Plan refers;
c) a copy of the draft Protection Plan, at least one year before the start of the period to which the plan refers.
2. To guarantee active participation and consultation, the regions shall grant a minimum period of six months for the presentation of written observations on the documents referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 also apply to the updates of the Protection Plans.

**Art. 123**
**Transmission of information and reports**
1. Concurrently with the publication of the Protection Plans, the regions shall transmit a copy of said plans and all subsequent updates to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea for the purpose of their subsequent forwarding to the European Commission.
2. The regions shall transmit to the same Ministry for subsequent forwarding to the European Commission, also on the basis of the information dictated, in the matter of methods for transmitting information on the quality status of water bodies and on the classification of waters, by the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea with a specific decree, summary reports concerning:
a) the cognitive activity referred to in Article 118 within twelve months from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree. The subsequent updates are transmitted every six years starting from February 2010;
b) the monitoring programs according to the provisions of Article 120 within twelve months from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree and subsequently on an annual basis.
3. Within three years of the publication of each Protection Plan or of the update referred to in Article 121, the regions shall transmit to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea a report on the progress made in the implementation of the basic or supplementary measures referred to in Article 116.

**CHAPTER II - AUTHORIZATION OF DISCHARGES**

**Art. 124**
**General criteria**
1. All discharges must be preventively authorized.
2. The authorization is issued to the holder of the activity from which the discharge originates. Where one or more establishments discharge to a third party, the holder of the final discharge, the wastewater from their activities, or where a consortium is established between several establishments for the joint discharge of wastewater from the activities of the consortium members, the authorization is issued to the holder of the final discharge or to the consortium itself, without prejudice to the responsibilities of the individual holders of the aforementioned activities and of the manager of the related purification plant in case of violation of the provisions of the third part of this decree. Where one or more establishments make discharges in common without having formed a consortium, the discharge authorization is issued to the holder of the final discharge, it being understood that the issuance of the authorization or its renewal is subject to the approval of a suitable project demonstrating the technical possibility of partitioning the individual discharges.
3. The authorization regime for discharges of domestic wastewater and from sewerage networks, whether or not served by urban wastewater treatment plants, is defined by the regions within the framework of the discipline referred to in Article 101, paragraphs 1 and 2.
4. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, discharges of domestic wastewater into sewerage networks are always permitted in compliance with the regulations established by the manager of the integrated water service and approved by the Area Authority.
5. The authorization regime for discharges of thermal wastewater is defined by the regions; such discharges are permitted in sewerage networks in compliance with the regulations issued by the manager of the integrated water service and in accordance with the authorization issued by the Area Authority.
6. The regions regulate the phases of provisional authorization for the discharges of wastewater treatment plants for the time necessary for their start-up.
7. Unless otherwise provided by regional regulations, the application for authorization is submitted to the province or to the Area Authority if the discharge is into a public sewer system. The competent authority shall provide a decision within sixty days of receiving the application. If said authority is non-compliant within the terms indicated above, the authorization is considered temporarily granted for the subsequent sixty days, subject to revocation.
8. Without prejudice to the provisions of Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005, the authorization is valid for four years from the moment of its issuance. A renewal must be requested one year before its expiry. The discharge may be provisionally maintained in operation in compliance with the prescriptions contained in the previous authorization, until the adoption of a new provision, if the renewal application has been submitted in a timely manner. For discharges containing hazardous substances referred to in Article 108, the renewal must be granted explicitly within and no later than six months from the expiry date; once this term has passed without effect, the discharge must cease immediately. The regional discipline referred to in paragraph 3 may provide for specific types of discharges of domestic wastewater, where subject to authorization, forms of tacit renewal of the same.
9. For discharges into a watercourse where a natural null flow is ascertained for more than one hundred and twenty days a year, or into a non-significant water body, the authorization takes into account the period of null flow and the dilution capacity of the water body in other periods, and establishes prescriptions and limits in order to guarantee the self-purification capacities of the receiving body and the protection of groundwater.
10. In relation to the technical characteristics of the discharge, its location, and the local conditions of the interested environment, the authorization contains further technical prescriptions aimed at ensuring that the discharge, including the operations functionally connected to it, occurs in accordance with the provisions of the third part of this decree and without any prejudice to the receiving body, public health, and the environment.
11. The expenses necessary for carrying out surveys, checks, controls, and inspections necessary for the preliminary investigation of the applications for discharge authorization provided for by the third part of this decree are borne by the applicant. The competent authority determines, prior to the preliminary investigation and on a provisional basis, the sum that the applicant is required to pay, as a deposit, as a condition for the admissibility of the application. The same Authority, once the preliminary investigation is completed, shall proceed with the final settlement of the expenses incurred on the basis of a tariff prepared by it.
12. For settlements, buildings, or establishments whose activity is transferred to another location, or for those subject to a different use, expansion, or restructuring from which a discharge derives with qualitatively and/or quantitatively different characteristics from that of the pre-existing discharge, a new authorization for the discharge must be requested, if the latter is subject to it. In cases where the discharge does not have different qualitative or quantitative characteristics, communication must be given to the competent authority, which, having verified the compatibility of the discharge with the receiving body, shall adopt the measures that may become necessary.

**Art. 125**
**Application for authorization of industrial wastewater discharges**
1. The application for authorization of industrial wastewater discharges must be accompanied by the indication of the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of the discharge and the annual volume of water to be discharged, the type of receiver, the identification of the point planned for carrying out control samples, the description of the overall discharge system including the operations functionally connected to it, any system for measuring the flow of discharges, where required, and the indication of the equipment used in the production process and in the discharge systems as well as the purification systems used to achieve compliance with the emission limit values.
2. In the case of discharges of substances referred to in table 3/A of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, deriving from the production cycles indicated in the same table 3/A, the application referred to in paragraph 1 must also indicate:
a) the production capacity of the individual industrial establishment that involves the production or transformation or use of the substances referred to in the same table, or the presence of such substances in the discharge. The production capacity must be indicated with reference to the maximum hourly capacity multiplied by the maximum number of daily working hours and by the maximum number of working days;
b) the hourly water requirement for each specific production process.

**Art. 126**
**Approval of the projects of urban wastewater treatment plants**
1. The regions regulate the approval procedures for the projects of urban wastewater treatment plants. This discipline must take into account the criteria of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree and the correspondence between the treatment capacity of the plant and the needs of the areas served, as well as the management methods that must ensure compliance with the discharge limit values. The regions also regulate the provisional authorization procedures necessary for the start-up of the plant, including in the case of construction in functional lots.

**Art. 127**
**Sludge from the treatment of wastewater**
1. Without prejudice to the discipline of Legislative Decree No. 99 of 27 January 1992, the sludge deriving from the treatment of wastewater is subject to the discipline of waste, where applicable. The sludge must be reused whenever its reuse is appropriate.
2. The disposal of sludge in fresh and brackish surface waters is prohibited.

**CHAPTER III - CONTROL OF DISCHARGES**

**Art. 128**
**Subjects required to control**
5. The competent authority carries out the control of discharges on the basis of a program that ensures a periodic, widespread, effective, and impartial system of controls.
6. Without prejudice to what is established in paragraph 1, for discharges into public sewers the manager of the integrated water service organizes an adequate control service according to the methods provided for in the management agreement.

**Art. 129**
**Access and inspections**
1. The authority competent for control is authorized to carry out the inspections, controls, and samples necessary to ascertain compliance with the emission limit values, the prescriptions contained in the authorizing or regulatory provisions, and the conditions that give rise to the formation of the discharges. The holder of the discharge is required to provide the information requested and to allow access to the places from which the discharge originates.

**Art. 130**
**Non-compliance with the prescriptions of the discharge authorization**
1. Without prejudice to the application of the sanctioning norms of Title V of the third part of this decree, in case of non-compliance with the prescriptions of the discharge authorization, the competent authority proceeds, according to the gravity of the infraction:
a) with a warning, establishing a term within which the non-compliances must be eliminated;
b) with a warning and simultaneous suspension of the authorization for a specified period, if situations of danger to public health and the environment arise;
c) with the revocation of the authorization in case of failure to adapt to the prescriptions imposed with the warning and in case of repeated violations that determine a situation of danger to public health and the environment.

**Art. 131**
**Control of discharges of hazardous substances**
1. For discharges containing the substances referred to in Table 5 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, the authority competent for issuing the authorization may prescribe, at the expense of the holder of the discharge, the installation of automatic control instruments, as well as the methods for their management and for the conservation of the relative results, which must remain available to the authority competent for control for a period of not less than three years from the date of execution of the individual controls.

**Art. 132**
**Substitute interventions**
1. In the case of failure to carry out the controls provided for by the third part of this decree, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall warn the region to provide within the maximum term of one hundred and eighty days or within the shorter term imposed by the needs of environmental protection. In case of persistent non-compliance, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall provide, in a substitute capacity, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, with charges borne by the non-compliant Entity.
2. In the exercise of the substitute powers referred to in paragraph 1, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall appoint an "ad acta" commissioner who carries out the acts necessary for the fulfillments provided for by the current legislation at the expense of the regions for the purpose of organizing the control system.

**TITLE V - SANCTIONS**

**CHAPTER I - ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS**

**Art. 133**
**Administrative sanctions**
1. Anyone who, unless the act constitutes a crime, in carrying out a discharge exceeds the emission limit values set in the tables of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, or the different limit values established by the regions according to Article 101, paragraph 2, or those set by the competent authority according to Article 107, paragraph 1, or Article 108, paragraph 1, is punished with an administrative sanction from three thousand euros to thirty thousand euros. If the non-compliance with the limit values concerns discharges into the safeguard areas of water resources intended for human consumption referred to in Article 94, or into water bodies located in the protected areas referred to in the current legislation, an administrative sanction of not less than twenty thousand euros is applied.
2. Anyone who opens or in any way carries out discharges of domestic wastewater or from sewerage networks, whether or not served by public purification plants, without the authorization referred to in Article 124, or continues to carry out or maintain said discharges after the authorization has been suspended or revoked, is punished with an administrative sanction from six thousand euros to sixty thousand euros. In the case of discharges related to isolated buildings used for residential purposes, the sanction is from six hundred euros to three thousand euros.
3. Anyone who, unless the act constitutes a crime, outside the cases referred to in paragraph 1, carries out or maintains a discharge without observing the prescriptions indicated in the authorization provision or set pursuant to Article 107, paragraph 1, is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from one thousand five hundred euros to fifteen thousand euros.
4. Anyone who, unless the act constitutes a crime, carries out the dumping at sea of the materials indicated in Article 109, paragraph 1, letters a) and b), or carries out the activity of laying at sea referred to in paragraph 5 of the same article, without authorization, is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from one thousand five hundred euros to fifteen thousand euros.
5. Unless the act constitutes a crime, until the issuance of the regional discipline referred to in Article 112, paragraph 2, anyone who does not observe the provisions of Article 170, paragraph 7, is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from six hundred euros to six thousand euros.
6. Anyone who, unless the act constitutes a crime, does not observe the prohibition of disposal of sludge provided for by Article 127, paragraph 2, is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from six thousand euros to sixty thousand euros.
7. Unless the act constitutes a crime, anyone who:
a) in carrying out the operations of desilting, flushing, or scouring of dams, exceeds the limits or does not observe the other prescriptions contained in the specific management project of the plant referred to in Article 114, paragraph 2;
b) carries out the same operations before the approval of the management project.
is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from three thousand euros to thirty thousand euros.
8. Anyone who violates the prescriptions concerning the installation and maintenance of devices for measuring flow rates and volumes, or the obligation to transmit the results of the measurements referred to in Article 95, paragraph 3, is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from one thousand five hundred euros to six thousand euros. In cases of particular triviality, the sanction is reduced to one-fifth.
9. Anyone who does not comply with the discipline laid down by the regions pursuant to Article 113, paragraph 1, letter b), is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from one thousand five hundred euros to fifteen thousand euros.

**Art. 134**
**Sanctions regarding safeguard areas**
1. Non-compliance with the provisions relating to the activities and destinations prohibited in the safeguard areas referred to in Article 94 is punished with a pecuniary administrative sanction from six hundred euros to six thousand euros.

**Art. 135**
**Competence and jurisdiction**
1. Regarding the ascertainment of administrative offenses, the region or the autonomous province in whose territory the violation was committed shall provide for the imposition of pecuniary administrative sanctions, by means of an order-injunction pursuant to Articles 18 and following of Law No. 689 of 24 November 1981, with the exception of the sanctions provided for in Article 133, paragraph 8, for which the municipality is competent, without prejudice to the attributions assigned by law to other public authorities.
2. Without prejudice to the provisions of Legislative Decree No. 112 of 31 March 1998, for the purposes of surveillance and ascertainment of offenses in violation of the norms on the protection of waters from pollution, the Carabinieri Command for the protection of the environment (C.C.T.A.) shall act; the State Forestry Corps may also intervene, and the Guardia di Finanza and the State Police may contribute. The Corps of the port authorities, Coast Guard, shall provide for the surveillance and ascertainment of the violations of the third part of this decree when damage or situations of danger to the marine and coastal environment may derive from them.
3. For criminal proceedings pending upon the entry into force of the third part of this decree, the judicial authority, if it does not have to issue a decree of dismissal or a sentence of acquittal, shall order the transmission of the acts to the entities indicated in paragraph 1 for the purposes of applying the administrative sanctions.
4. The payment in a reduced measure referred to in Article 16 of Law No. 689 of 24 November 1981 does not apply to the pecuniary administrative sanctions provided for by the third part of this decree.

**Art. 136**
**Proceeds from pecuniary administrative sanctions**
1. The sums deriving from the proceeds of the administrative sanctions provided for by the third part of this decree are paid to the entry of the regional budget to be reassigned to the basic forecast units intended for the works of remediation and reduction of pollution of water bodies. The regions shall provide for the distribution of the sums collected among the prevention and remediation interventions.

**CHAPTER II - PENAL SANCTIONS**

**Art. 137**
**Penal sanctions**
1. Anyone who opens or in any way carries out new discharges of industrial wastewater, without authorization, or continues to carry out or maintain said discharges after the authorization has been suspended or revoked, is punished with arrest from two months to two years or with a fine from one thousand five hundred euros to ten thousand euros.
2. When the conducts described in paragraph 1 concern discharges of industrial wastewater containing the hazardous substances included in the families and groups of substances indicated in tables 5 and 3/A of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, the penalty is arrest from three months to three years.
3. Anyone who, outside the cases referred to in paragraph 5, carries out a discharge of industrial wastewater containing the hazardous substances included in the families and groups of substances indicated in tables 5 and 3/A of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree without observing the prescriptions of the authorization, or the other prescriptions of the competent authority under Articles 107, paragraph 1, and 108, paragraph 4, is punished with arrest up to two years.
4. Anyone who violates the prescriptions concerning the installation and management of automatic controls or the obligation to preserve their results, as per Article 131, is punished with the penalty of paragraph 3.
5. Anyone who, in carrying out a discharge of industrial wastewater, exceeds the limit values set in table 3 or, in the case of discharge on the soil, in table 4 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, or exceeds the more restrictive limits set by the regions or autonomous provinces or by the competent Authority under Article 107, paragraph 1, in relation to the substances indicated in table 5 of Annex 5 to the third part of this decree, is punished with arrest up to two years and with a fine from three thousand euros to thirty thousand euros. If the limit values set for the substances contained in table 3/A of the same Annex 5 are also exceeded, arrest from six months to three years and a fine from six thousand euros to one hundred and twenty thousand euros apply.
6. The sanctions referred to in paragraph 5 also apply to the manager of urban wastewater treatment plants who, in carrying out the discharge, exceeds the limit values provided for by the same paragraph.
7. The manager of the integrated water service who does not comply with the communication obligation of Article 110, paragraph 3, or does not observe the prescriptions or prohibitions of Article 110, paragraph 5, is punished with arrest from three months to one year or with a fine from three thousand euros to thirty thousand euros if it concerns non-hazardous waste, and with the penalty of arrest from six months to two years and with a fine from three thousand euros to thirty thousand euros if it concerns hazardous waste.
8. The holder of a discharge who does not allow access to the settlements by the person in charge of control for the purposes of Article 101, paragraphs 3 and 4, unless the act constitutes a more serious crime, is punished with the penalty of arrest up to two years. The powers-duties of intervention of the persons in charge of control, also pursuant to Article 13 of Law no. 689 of 1981 and Articles 55 and 354 of the code of criminal procedure, remain firm.
9. Anyone who does not comply with the discipline laid down by the regions pursuant to Article 113, paragraph 3, is punished with the sanctions of Article 137, paragraph 1.
10. Anyone who does not comply with the measure adopted by the competent authority pursuant to Article 84, paragraph 4, or Article 85, paragraph 2, is punished with a fine from one thousand five hundred euros to fifteen thousand euros.
11. Anyone who does not observe the discharge prohibitions provided for by Articles 103 and 104 is punished with arrest up to three years.
12. Anyone who does not observe the regional prescriptions adopted under Article 88, paragraphs 1 and 2, aimed at ensuring the achievement or restoration of the quality objectives of the waters designated pursuant to Article 87, or does not comply with the measures adopted by the competent authority pursuant to Article 87, paragraph 3, is punished with arrest up to two years or with a fine from four thousand euros to forty thousand euros.
13. The penalty of arrest from two months to two years is always applied if the discharge into the waters of the sea from ships or aircraft contains substances or materials for which the absolute prohibition of dumping is imposed under the provisions contained in the international conventions in force on the matter and ratified by Italy, unless they are in quantities such as to be rendered rapidly harmless by the physical, chemical, and biological processes that occur naturally in the sea and provided that there is prior authorization from the competent authority.
14. Anyone who carries out the agronomic use of livestock effluents, vegetation water from olive mills, as well as wastewater from agricultural and small agri-food businesses as per Article 112, outside the cases and procedures provided therein, or does not comply with the prohibition or order of suspension of the activity issued under said article, is punished with a fine from one thousand five hundred euros to ten thousand euros or with arrest up to one year. The same penalty applies to anyone who carries out agronomic use outside the cases and procedures of the current legislation.

**Art. 138**
**Further sanctioning measures for shellfish farming activity**
1. In the cases provided for by paragraph 12 of Article 137, the Minister of Health, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, as well as the competent region and autonomous province, to whom a copy of the criminal reports is sent, may order, for their respective competencies and regardless of the outcome of the criminal trial, the precautionary suspension of the shellfish farming activity; following a sentence of conviction or a decision issued pursuant to Article 444 of the code of criminal procedure that have become final, they may also order, having assessed the gravity of the facts, the closure of the plants.

**Art. 139**
**Obligations of the convicted person**
1. With the sentence of conviction for the crimes provided for in the third part of this decree, or with the decision issued pursuant to Article 444 of the code of criminal procedure, the benefit of the conditional suspension of the penalty may be subordinated to the compensation for the damage and to the execution of the safety, remediation, and restoration interventions.

**Art. 140**
**Attenuating circumstance**
1. Towards those who, before the criminal judgment or the order-injunction, have fully repaired the damage, the penal and administrative sanctions provided for in this title are reduced from one half to two thirds.

**SECTION III - MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES**

**TITLE I - GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND COMPETENCIES**

**Art. 141**
**Scope of application**
1. The subject of the provisions contained in this section is the discipline of the management of water resources and of the integrated water service for the profiles concerning the protection of the environment and competition and the determination of the essential levels of the performances of the integrated water service and of the related fundamental functions of municipalities, provinces and metropolitan cities.
2. The integrated water service consists of the set of public services of capture, adduction and distribution of water for civil uses, of sewerage and of purification of wastewater, and must be managed according to principles of efficiency, effectiveness and economy, in compliance with national and community norms. These provisions also apply to the industrial uses of water managed within the integrated water service.

**Art. 142**
**Competencies**
1. Within the framework of the competencies defined by the constitutional norms, and without prejudice to the competencies of the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea exercises the functions and tasks pertaining to the State in the matters regulated by this section.
2. The regions exercise the functions and tasks pertaining to them within the framework of the constitutionally determined competencies and in respect of the state attributions of paragraph 1, and in particular they provide for the governance of their respective territory.
3. Local authorities, through the Area Authority of Article 148, paragraph 1, carry out the functions of organizing the integrated water service, of choosing the form of management, of determining and modulating the tariffs for users, of entrusting the management and its related control, according to the provisions of the third part of this decree.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 143**
**Ownership of infrastructures**
1. Aqueducts, sewers, purification plants and other public-owned water infrastructures, up to the point of delivery and/or measurement, are part of the state property pursuant to Articles 822 and following of the civil code and are inalienable except in the ways and within the limits established by law.
2. The Area Authority is also responsible for the protection of the assets referred to in paragraph 1, pursuant to Article 823, second paragraph, of the civil code.

**Art. 144**
**Protection and use of water resources**
1. All surface and groundwater, even if not extracted from the subsoil, belong to the State property.
2. Water constitutes a resource that must be protected and used according to criteria of solidarity; any use of it is carried out safeguarding the expectations and rights of future generations to enjoy an intact environmental heritage.
3. The discipline of the uses of water is aimed at their rationalization, in order to avoid waste and to favor the renewal of resources, not to prejudice the water heritage, the livability of the environment, agriculture, fish farming, aquatic fauna and flora, geomorphological processes and hydrological balances.
4. Uses other than human consumption are permitted within the limits in which the water resources are sufficient and on condition that they do not prejudice their quality.
5. Thermal, mineral and geothermal waters are regulated by specific norms, in respect of the division of constitutionally determined competencies.

**Art. 145**
**Equilibrium of the water balance**
1. The competent Basin Authority defines and periodically updates the water balance aimed at ensuring the equilibrium between the availability of resources that can be sourced or activated in the reference area and the needs for the different uses, in respect of the criteria and objectives of Article 144.
2. To ensure the equilibrium between resources and needs, the competent Basin Authority adopts, for its competence, the measures for the planning of the water economy in function of the uses for which the resources are intended.
3. In river basins characterized by substantial withdrawals or transfers, both downstream and beyond the watershed line, the derivations are regulated in such a way as to guarantee the necessary flow level for life in the underlying riverbeds and such as not to damage the equilibria of the interested ecosystems.

**Art. 146**
**Water saving**
1. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the regions, having heard the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), in respect of the principles of state legislation, shall adopt norms and measures aimed at rationalizing consumption and eliminating waste and in particular at:
a) improving the maintenance of the adduction and distribution networks of water for any use intended to reduce losses;
b) providing, in the construction or replacement of new transport and distribution plants for water, both internal and external, the obligation to use anti-corrosion protection systems for metal pipelines;
c) realizing, in particular in new residential, commercial and productive settlements of significant size, dual adduction networks for the purpose of using less valuable water for compatible uses;
d) promoting information and the dissemination of methods and techniques of domestic water saving and in the industrial, tertiary and agricultural sectors;
e) adopting high-efficiency irrigation systems accompanied by their correct management and by the replacement, where appropriate, of open channel networks with pressurized networks;
f) installing meters for the consumption of water in each single housing unit as well as differentiated meters for the productive activities and the tertiary sector carried out in the urban context;
g) realizing in new settlements, when economically and technically convenient also in relation to the final receiving bodies, differentiated collection systems for rainwater and for wastewater and first flush;
h) identifying aquifer recharge areas and adopting protection and management measures aimed at guaranteeing a quantitatively and qualitatively suitable recharge process.
2. Urban planning instruments, compatibly with the urban and territorial structure and with the available financial resources, must provide for dual networks for the purpose of making possible appropriate uses of even non-potable water. The issuance of the building permit is subordinated to the provision, in the project, of the installation of meters for each single housing unit, as well as of the connection to dual networks, where already available.
3. Within one year from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, having heard the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) and the Department for the protection of inland and marine waters of the Agency for Environmental Protection and for Technical Services (APAT), shall adopt a regulation for the definition of the criteria and methods on the basis of which to evaluate the losses of aqueducts and sewers. By the month of February of each year, the managers of the water services shall transmit to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) and to the competent Area Authority the results of the surveys carried out with the aforesaid methods.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**TITLE II - INTEGRATED WATER SERVICE**

**Art. 147**
**Territorial organization of the integrated water service**
1. The water services are organized on the basis of the optimal territorial areas defined by the regions in implementation of Law No. 36 of 5 January 1994.
2. The regions may modify the delimitations of the optimal territorial areas to improve the management of the integrated water service, in any case ensuring its performance according to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness and economy, in respect, in particular, of the following principles:
a) unity of the river basin or of the sub-basin or of the contiguous river basins, taking into account the basin plans, as well as the location of the resources and their constraints of destination, also deriving from custom, in favor of the interested inhabited centers;
b) uniqueness of the management and, in any case, overcoming of the vertical fragmentation of the managements;
c) adequacy of the management dimensions, defined on the basis of physical, demographic, technical parameters.
3. The regions, having heard the provinces, shall establish supplementary norms for the control of the discharges of civil and productive settlements connected to public sewers, for the functionality of pretreatment plants and for compliance with the limits and prescriptions provided for by the relative authorizations.

**Art. 148**
**Optimal territorial area authority**
1. The Area Authority is a structure with legal personality established in each optimal territorial area delimited by the competent region, in which the local authorities mandatorily participate and to which the exercise of the competencies pertaining to them in the matter of management of water resources is transferred, including the programming of the water infrastructures referred to in Article 143, paragraph 1.
2. The regions and autonomous provinces may regulate the forms and ways of cooperation between the local authorities falling within the same optimal area, providing that they themselves constitute the Area Authorities referred to in paragraph 1, to which the organization, entrustment and control of the management of the integrated water service is delegated.
3. The preventive and final budgets of the Area Authority and their variations are published by posting on a special notice board, established at the headquarters of the body, and are transmitted to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) and to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea within fifteen days of the adoption of the relative resolutions.
4. The operating costs of the operational structure of the Area Authority, determined annually, are charged to the local authorities falling within the optimal territorial area, based on the participation quotas of each of them in the Area Authority.
5. Without prejudice to the mandatory participation in the Area Authority of all local authorities pursuant to paragraph 1, adhesion to the single management of the integrated water service is optional for municipalities with a population of up to 1,000 inhabitants included in the territory of the mountain communities, on condition that the management of the water service is operated directly by the municipal administration or through a company with entirely public capital and controlled by the same municipality. On the managements of this paragraph, the Area Authority exercises functions of general regulation and control. With a specific service contract stipulated with the Area Authority, after a program agreement, criteria and methods are defined for the eventual participation in initiatives promoted by the Area Authority itself.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 149**
**Area plan**
1. Within twelve months from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the Area Authority shall provide for the preparation and/or updating of the area plan. The area plan consists of the following acts:
a) survey of the infrastructures;
b) program of interventions;
c) management and organizational model;
d) economic and financial plan.
2. The survey, also on the basis of information certified by the local authorities falling within the optimal territorial area, identifies the state of consistency of the infrastructures to be entrusted to the manager of the integrated water service, specifying their state of operation.
3. The program of interventions identifies the extraordinary maintenance works and the new works to be carried out, including the interventions for the adaptation of already existing infrastructures, necessary to achieve at least the minimum service levels, as well as to satisfy the overall demand of the users. The program of interventions, commensurate with the entire management, specifies the objectives to be achieved, indicating the infrastructures planned for this purpose and the implementation times.
4. The economic and financial plan, articulated in the balance sheet, the income statement, and the cash flow statement, provides, on an annual basis, the trend of the management and investment costs net of any public funding grants. It is integrated by the annual forecast of the revenues from tariffs, extended to the entire period of entrustment. The plan, as drafted, must guarantee the achievement of the economic and financial equilibrium and, in any case, respect for the principles of effectiveness, efficiency, and economy of the management, also in relation to the planned investments.
5. The management and organizational model defines the operational structure through which the manager ensures the service to the users and the realization of the program of interventions.
6. The area plan is transmitted within ten days of the approval resolution to the competent region, to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) and to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea. The Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) may notify the Area Authority, within ninety days from the receipt of the plan, its findings or observations, dictating, where necessary, prescriptions concerning: the program of interventions, with particular reference to the adequacy of the planned investments in relation to the minimum service levels identified as management objectives; the financial plan, with particular reference to the capacity of the tariff evolution to guarantee the economic and financial equilibrium of the management, also in relation to the planned investments.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 150**
**Choice of the form of management and entrustment procedures**
1. The Area Authority, in respect of the area plan and the principle of uniqueness of management for each area, deliberates the form of management from among those of Article 113, paragraph 5, of Legislative Decree No. 267 of 18 August 2000.
2. The Area Authority awards the management of the integrated water service by means of a tender regulated by the principles and community provisions, in accordance with the criteria of Article 113, paragraph 7, of Legislative Decree No. 267 of 18 August 2000, according to methods and terms established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in respect of regional competencies on the matter.
3. The management can also be entrusted to companies participated in exclusively and directly by municipalities or other local authorities included in the optimal territorial area, if objective technical or economic reasons exist, according to the provision of paragraph 5, letter c), of Article 113 of Legislative Decree No. 267 of 18 August 2000, or to companies only partially participated in by such entities, according to the provision of paragraph 5, letter b), of Article 113 of Legislative Decree No. 267 of 18 August 2000, provided that the private partner has been chosen, before the entrustment, with a tender to be carried out with the methods of paragraph 2.
4. The subjects of this article manage the integrated water service over the entire territory of the local authorities falling within the optimal territorial area, except as provided for in Article 148, paragraph 5.

**Art. 151**
**Relations between area authorities and managers of the integrated water service**
1. The relations between Area Authorities and managers of the integrated water service are regulated by conventions prepared by the Area Authority.
2. To this end, the regions and autonomous provinces adopt standard conventions, with related specifications, which must provide in particular:
a) the legal regime chosen for the management of the service;
b) the duration of the entrustment, not exceeding in any case thirty years;
c) the obligation to achieve the economic and financial equilibrium of the management;
d) the level of efficiency and reliability of the service to be assured to the users, also with reference to the maintenance of the plants;
e) the criteria and methods of application of the tariffs determined by the Area Authority and their annual updating, also with reference to the different categories of users;
f) the obligation to adopt the service charter on the basis of the current guidance acts;
g) the obligation to provide for the realization of the Program of interventions;
h) the methods of control of the correct exercise of the service and the obligation to prepare a technical system suitable for this purpose, as provided for in Article 165;
i) the duty to provide every collaboration for the organization and activation of the integrated control systems that the Area Authority has the faculty to arrange throughout the period of entrustment;
l) the obligation to give timely communication to the Area Authority of the occurrence of events that involve or make one foresee irregularities in the provision of the service, as well as the obligation to take every initiative for the elimination of the irregularities, in accordance with the prescriptions of the Area Authority itself;
m) the obligation of restitution, at the expiry of the entrustment, of the works, plants and channels of the integrated water service in conditions of efficiency and in a good state of conservation;
n) the obligation to provide suitable financial and insurance guarantees;
o) the penalties, the sanctions in case of non-fulfillment and the conditions of resolution according to the principles of the civil code;
p) the methods of reporting on the activities of the manager.
3. On the basis of the convention of paragraph 2, the Area Authority prepares a draft convention with its related specification, to be attached to the tender documents. Where the region or the autonomous province has not provided for the adoption of the standard conventions and specifications of paragraph 2, the Area Authority prepares the draft on the basis of the current legislation. Existing conventions must be integrated in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2.
4. In the Specification attached to the Management Convention, the works and extraordinary maintenance, as well as the temporal and financial program of execution, must also be defined, on the basis of the program of interventions.
5. The entrustment of the service is subordinated to the provision by the manager of a suitable surety guarantee. This guarantee must cover the interventions to be carried out in the first five years of management and must be updated annually so as to cover the interventions to be carried out in the subsequent five-year period.
6. The manager shall update the Survey act within the terms established by the convention.
7. The concessionaire of the integrated water service, with the prior consent of the Area Authority, may manage other public services, in addition to the water service, but compatible with it, even if not extended to the entire optimal territorial area.
8. The concessionary companies of the integrated water service, as well as the mixed companies established following the identification of the private partner through a European tender, concessionaires of the service itself, may issue bonds subscribable exclusively by users with the faculty of conversion into ordinary or savings shares. In the case of an increase in the share capital, a quota of not less than ten percent is offered for subscription to the users of the service.

**Art. 152**
**Control and substitute powers**
1. The Area Authority has the faculty of access and verification to the water infrastructures, including during the construction phase.
2. In the case of non-fulfillment by the manager of the obligations deriving from the law or the convention, which compromise the resource or the environment or which do not allow the achievement of the minimum service levels, the Area Authority shall intervene promptly to guarantee the fulfillment by the manager, exercising all the powers conferred on it by the provisions of the law and the convention. If the non-fulfillment of the manager persists, and without prejudice to the consequent penalties at his expense, as well as the power of resolution and revocation, the Area Authority, after a warning, may replace him by having the works carried out by third parties, in respect of the current provisions on public procurement.
3. If the Area Authority does not intervene, or in any case delays its intervention, the region, after a warning and having heard the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), shall exercise the necessary substitute powers, by appointing an "ad acta" commissioner. If the region does not comply within forty-five days, the aforesaid substitute powers are exercised, after a warning to comply within the term of twenty days, by the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, by appointing an "ad acta" commissioner.
4. The Area Authority shall communicate annually to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) the results of the management controls.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 153**
**Assets of the managers of the integrated water service**
1. The water infrastructures owned by the local authorities pursuant to Article 143 are entrusted in free use concession, for the entire duration of the management, to the manager of the integrated water service, who assumes the relative charges in the terms provided for by the convention and its related specification.
2. The fixed assets, assets, and liabilities relating to the integrated water service, including the charges connected with the amortization of loans or the loans themselves, net of any non-repayable capital and/or interest grants, are transferred to the manager, who succeeds in the relative obligations. This transfer is taken into account in determining the tariff, in order to guarantee the invariance of the charges for public finance.

**Art. 154**
**Tariff of the integrated water service**
1. The tariff constitutes the consideration for the integrated water service and is determined taking into account the quality of the water resource and the service provided, the necessary works and adjustments, the extent of the costs of management of the works, the adequacy of the remuneration of the invested capital and the costs of management of the safeguard areas, as well as a share of the operating costs of the Area Authority, so as to ensure the full coverage of the investment and operating costs according to the principle of cost recovery and according to the "polluter pays" principle. All the components of the tariff of the integrated water service have the nature of consideration.
2. The Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, on the proposal of the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), taking into account the need to recover environmental costs also according to the "polluter pays" principle, defines by decree the cost components for the determination of the tariff relating to water services for the various sectors of water use.
3. In order to ensure a homogeneous discipline on the national territory, by decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance, in concert with the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, the general criteria for the determination, by the regions, of the concession fees for the use of public water are established, taking into account the environmental costs and the resource costs and also providing for reductions of the fee in the case in which the concessionaire implements a reuse of water by re-employing the water resulting downstream of the production process or a part of it or, again, returns the discharge water with the same qualitative characteristics as that withdrawn. The updating of the fees is triennial.
4. The Area Authority, for the purpose of preparing the Financial Plan referred to in Article 149, paragraph 1, letter c), determines the basic tariff, in compliance with the provisions contained in the decree referred to in paragraph 2, communicating it to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) and to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea.
5. The tariff is applied by the managers, in respect of the Convention and its related specification.
6. In the modulation of the tariff, facilities are ensured, including through compensations for other types of consumption, for essential domestic ones, as well as for the consumption of certain categories, according to pre-established income brackets. To achieve objectives of equitable redistribution of costs, tariff increases are permitted for second homes, for seasonal accommodation facilities, as well as for craft, commercial and industrial businesses.
7. The eventual modulation of the tariff among the municipalities takes into account the per capita investments for residents made by the municipalities themselves that are useful for the purposes of organizing the integrated water service.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 155**
**Tariff of the sewerage and purification service**
1. The tariff components referring to the public sewerage and purification services are due by the users even in the case where there are no purification plants or these are temporarily inactive. The manager is required to pay the relative proceeds, resulting from the tariff formulation defined pursuant to Article 154, into a restricted fund in the name of the Area Authority, which makes it available to the manager for the implementation of the interventions relating to the sewerage networks and purification plants provided for in the area plan. The tariff is not due if the user is equipped with their own collection and purification systems, provided that such systems have received specific approval from the Area Authority.
2. Pending the entrustment of the management of the local water services to the manager of the integrated water service, the municipalities already equipped with functioning purification plants, which are not in a state of financial distress, shall allocate the proceeds deriving from the purification and sewerage fee primarily to the maintenance of the plants themselves.
3. The users required to pay the tariff referring to the public sewerage service, referred to in paragraph 1, are exempt from the payment of any other tariff possibly due for the same title to other public bodies.
4. For the purpose of determining the tariff component referred to in this article, the volume of discharged water is determined as one hundred percent of the volume of water supplied.
5. For industrial users, the tariff component referred to in this article is determined on the basis of the quality and quantity of the discharged wastewater and on the basis of the "polluter pays" principle. The possibility of determining a reduced tariff component for users who provide directly for purification and who use the public sewer system is without prejudice, provided that their respective purification systems have received specific approval from the Area Authority.
6. For the purpose of encouraging the reuse of wastewater or already used water in the production cycle, the tariff for industrial users is reduced in function of the use in the production process of wastewater or already used water. The reduction is determined by applying a corrective factor to the tariff, which takes into account the quantity of reused water and the quantity of primary water used.

**Art. 156**
**Collection of the tariff**
1. The tariff is collected by the manager of the integrated water service. If the water service is managed separately, as a result of particular conventions and concessions, the relative tariff is collected by the manager of the aqueduct service, who provides for the subsequent distribution among the various interested managers within thirty days of collection.
2. With a specific convention, subject to the control of the region, the relations between the various managers for the distribution of the collection expenses are defined.
3. The voluntary and coercive collection of the tariff can be carried out according to the provisions of the decree of the President of the Republic No. 602 of 29 September 1973, by means of a convention with the Revenue Agency.

**Art. 157**
**Works for the adaptation of the water service**
1. The local authorities have the faculty to carry out the necessary works to provide for the adaptation of the water service in relation to urban plans and to concessions for new buildings in already urbanized areas, after an opinion of compatibility with the area plan rendered by the Area Authority and following a convention with the manager of the service itself, to whom the works, once realized, are entrusted in concession.

**Art. 158**
**Works and interventions for the transfer of water**
1. In order to plan the use of water resources, where the need involves or may involve the transfer of water between different regions and this goes beyond the reference areas of the hydrographic districts, the Basin Authorities, having heard the interested regions, shall promote program agreements between the regions themselves, pursuant to Article 34 of Legislative Decree No. 267 of 18 August 2000, in any case safeguarding the purposes of Article 144 of this decree. To this end, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and the Minister of Infrastructure and Transport, each for their own competence, shall jointly take the appropriate initiatives also at the request of a Basin Authority or an interested region or also in the presence of a request presented by other public subjects or by interested private subjects, setting a deadline for defining the agreements.
2. In case of inertia, of lack of agreement regarding the use of water resources, or of non-implementation of the agreement itself, the President of the Council of Ministers shall provide in a substitute capacity, after a warning to comply within a suitable term, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea.
3. The works and plants necessary for the purposes of this article are declared of national interest. Their realization and management, if of public initiative, can also be placed entirely at the expense of the State through quantification of the charge and its relative financial coverage, after deliberation of the Interministerial Committee for Economic Planning (CIPE), on the proposal of the Ministers of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and of Infrastructure and Transport, each for their respective competence. The Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall carry out the procedures for the concession of use of the water to the user subjects and defines the relative standard convention; the Minister of Infrastructure and Transport is responsible for determining the criteria and methods for the execution and management of the interventions, as well as the entrustment for the realization and management of the plants.

**TITLE III - SUPERVISION, CONTROLS AND PARTICIPATION**

**Art. 159** *[Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste]*
*[Repealed]*

**Art. 160** *[Tasks and functions of the Supervisory Authority]*
*[Repealed]*

**Art. 161**
**Observatory on water resources and waste**
1. The Authority, for the performance of its tasks, shall avail itself of an Observatory on the sectors of its competence. The Observatory carries out functions of collection, processing and restitution of statistical and cognitive data, forming a database connected with the information systems of the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, of the regions and of the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, of the Basin Authorities and of the public subjects who hold information in the sector. In particular, the Observatory collects and processes data concerning:
a) the census of the participants in the tenders for the entrustment of the services, as well as of the managing subjects in relation to the dimensional, technical and financial data of operation;
b) the general conditions of contract and conventions for the exercise of the services;
c) the models adopted of organization, management, control and programming of the services and plants;
d) the levels of quality of the services provided;
e) the tariffs applied;
f) the investment plans for the modernization of the plants and the development of the services.
2. The managers of the water services and of the collection and disposal of waste shall transmit every twelve months to the Observatory the data and information of paragraph 1 and in any case all the data that the Observatory requests from them at any time.
3. On the basis of the data acquired, the Observatory carries out, at the request of the Authority, processing for the purpose, among other things, of:
a) defining productivity indices for the evaluation of the economy of the managements against the services rendered;
b) identifying technological levels and optimal organizational models of the services;
c) defining evaluation parameters for the control of the tariff policies practiced, also in support of the decision-making bodies in the matter of setting tariffs and their constraints and adjustments, verifying compliance with the criteria set on the matter by the competent state bodies;
d) identifying situations of criticality and functional irregularity of the services or of non-observance of the current regulatory prescriptions on the matter;
e) promoting the experimentation and adoption of innovative technologies;
f) verifying the feasibility and congruity of the investment programs in relation to the financial resources and the tariff policy;
g) realizing summary cognitive frameworks.
4. The Observatory ensures generalized access, including by computer, to the data collected and to the processing carried out according to the deliberation of the Authority and in respect of the general provisions.
5. By decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance and with the Minister for Public Function, the organic structure of the Observatory, which is headed by a director, and the operating expenses are determined, in respect of the principle of the invariance of the charges borne by public finance. For the performance of its tasks, the Observatory, on the indication of the Authority, may avail itself of the consultancy of experts in the sector and stipulate conventions with public research bodies and with specialized companies.

**Art. 162**
**Participation, guarantee and information of users**
1. The manager of the integrated water service ensures information to users, promotes initiatives for the dissemination of the culture of water and guarantees the access of citizens to information concerning the services managed in the optimal territorial area of its competence, the technologies used, the functioning of the plants, the quantity and quality of the water supplied and treated.
2. The Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, the regions and the autonomous provinces, within their respective competencies, shall ensure the publicity of the projects concerning hydraulic works that involve or presuppose large and small derivations, damming or canalization works, as well as the drilling of wells. To this end, the competent administrations shall ensure the publication of the concession applications, concurrently with the start of the procedure, in addition to the forms provided for by Article 7 of the single text of the legal provisions on water and electrical plants, approved with Royal Decree No. 1775 of 11 December 1933, in at least one national daily newspaper and one local daily newspaper for large derivations of water from transnational and border rivers.
3. Anyone can view at the competent offices of the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, of the regions and of the autonomous provinces all the documents, acts, studies and projects relating to the concession applications referred to in paragraph 2 of this article, pursuant to the current provisions on the publicity of the acts of the public administrations.

**Art. 163**
**Management of safeguard areas**
1. To ensure the protection of the safeguard areas of water resources intended for human consumption, the manager of the integrated water service may stipulate conventions with the State, the regions, the local authorities, the associations and the agrarian universities holders of collective domains, for the direct management of the public or collective domains falling within the perimeter of the aforesaid areas, in respect of the protection of nature and taking into account the rights of civic use exercised.
2. The tariff component referred to the costs for the management of the safeguard areas, in case of transfers of water from one optimal territorial area to another, is paid to the mountain community, where established, or to the local authorities in whose territory the derivations fall; the relative proceeds are used for the purposes of the protection and recovery of environmental resources.

**Art. 164**
**Discipline of water in protected areas**
1. Within the national and regional protected natural areas, the managing body of the protected area, having heard the Basin Authority, defines the spring, flowing and groundwater necessary for the conservation of the ecosystems, which cannot be captured.
2. The recognition and preferential concession of the surface or spring waters that have assumed a public nature by effect of Article 1 of Law No. 36 of 5 January 1994, as well as the concessions in regularization, are issued upon the opinion of the managing body of the natural protected area. The managing bodies of protected areas verify the captures and derivations already granted within the areas themselves and request the competent authority to modify the quantities of release if they recognize alterations of the biological balances of the watercourses object of capture, without this giving rise to the payment of indemnities by the public administration, without prejudice to the relative reduction of the state concession fee.

**Art. 165**
**Controls**
1. To ensure the supply of good quality water and for the control of discharges into the receiving bodies, each manager of the water service shall equip itself with an adequate territorial control service and an analysis laboratory for the quality controls of the water at the intake, in the adduction and distribution networks, in the purifiers and in the treatment plants, or stipulates a specific convention with other managers of water services. The administrative competencies and the control functions on the quality of the water and on the discharges into the water bodies established by the current legislation and those of the technical bodies responsible for such functions remain firm.
2. Those who supply themselves in whole or in part with water from sources other than the public aqueduct are required to report annually to the manager of the water service the quantity withdrawn in the terms and according to the methods provided for by the legislation for the protection of water from pollution.
3. The sanctions provided for by Article 19 of Legislative Decree No. 31 of 2 February 2001, apply to the person responsible for the management of the aqueduct only in the case in which, after the communication of the outcome of the analyses, he has not promptly adopted the measures suitable to adapt the quality of the water or to prevent the consumption or supply of non-compliant water.

**TITLE IV - PRODUCTIVE USES OF WATER RESOURCES**

**Art. 166**
**Uses of irrigation and land reclamation waters**
1. The land reclamation and irrigation consortia, within their competencies, have the faculty to realize and manage the networks for predominantly irrigation purposes, the plants for the use in agriculture of wastewater, the rural aqueducts and the other plants functional to the irrigation and land reclamation systems and, upon application to the competent authorities accompanied by the project of the works to be realized, have the faculty to use the flowing waters in the consortial channels and ditches for uses that involve the restitution of the water and are compatible with the subsequent uses, including the production of hydroelectric energy and the supply of productive enterprises. The Basin Authority expresses its determination within one hundred and twenty days. After this term, the application is considered accepted. For such uses, the consortia are obliged to pay the relative fees for the corresponding quantities of water, with the provisions of the second paragraph of Article 36 of the single text of the legal provisions on water and electrical plants, approved with Royal Decree No. 1775 of 11 December 1933, also applying in such cases.
2. The relations between the land reclamation and irrigation consortia and the subjects who practice the uses of paragraph 1 are regulated by the provisions of chapter I of title VI of Royal Decree No. 368 of 8 May 1904.
3. Without prejudice to compliance with the discipline on the quality of water and discharges established by the third part of this decree, anyone who, not associated with the land reclamation and irrigation consortia, uses consortial channels or irrigation water as a receiver of discharges, even if purified and compatible with irrigation use, coming from settlements of any nature, must contribute to the expenses incurred by the consortium, taking into account the flow rate of discharged water.
4. The contribution of paragraph 3 is determined by the interested consortium and communicated to the user subject, together with the methods of payment.

**Art. 167**
**Agricultural uses of water**
1. In periods of drought and in any case in cases of scarcity of water resources, during which the regulation of the derivations in progress is carried out, the priority of agricultural use, including the aquaculture activity of Law No. 102 of 5 February 1992, must be ensured after human consumption.
2. In the case in which, pursuant to Article 145, paragraph 3, the regulation of the derivations is carried out, the competent administration, having heard the subjects holding the derivation concessions, shall take the relative measures.
3. The collection of rainwater in reservoirs and tanks serving agricultural lands or single buildings is free.
4. The collection referred to in paragraph 3 does not require a license or concession for the derivation of water; the realization of the relative structures is regulated by the laws on construction, on constructions in seismic zones, on dams and weirs and by other special laws.
1. The use of groundwater for domestic uses, as defined by Article 93, second paragraph, of the single text of the legal provisions on water and electrical plants, approved with Royal Decree No. 1775 of 11 December 1933, remains regulated by the same provision, provided it does not compromise the equilibrium of the water balance of Article 145 of this decree.

**Art. 168**
**Use of water intended for hydroelectric use**
1. Taking into account the principles of the third part of this decree and of the national energy plan, as well as the guidelines for the multiple uses of water resources, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, having heard the Basin Authorities, as well as the regions and autonomous provinces, shall regulate, without this giving rise to the payment of indemnities by the public administration, without prejudice to the corresponding reduction of the concession fee:
a) the production for the purpose of the sale of desalinated water obtained in the production cycles of coastal power plants;
b) the use of impounded water for hydroelectric purposes to face situations of water emergency;
c) the defense and remediation for the safeguarding of the quantity and quality of the water of the reservoirs for hydroelectric use.

**Art. 169**
**Plans, studies and research**
1. The plans, studies and research carried out by the State Administrations and by public bodies with competence in the matters regulated by the third part of this decree are communicated to the competent Basin Authorities for the territory for the purposes of the preparation of the plans entrusted to them.

**SECTION IV - TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS**

**Art. 170**
**Transitional norms**
1. For the purposes of the application of Article 65, limited to the procedures for the adoption and approval of the basin plans, until the date of entry into force of the second part of this decree, the procedures for the adoption and approval of the basin plans provided for by Law No. 183 of 18 May 1989 continue to apply.
2. For the purposes of the application of Article 1 of decree-law no. 279 of 12 October 2000, converted, with modifications, by law no. 365 of 11 December 2000, the references contained therein to Article 1 of decree-law no. 180 of 11 June 1998, converted, with modifications, by law no. 267 of 3 August 1998, must be understood as referring to Article 66 of this decree; i references to Law no. 183 of 18 May 1989, are to be understood as referring to the first section of the third part of this decree, where compatible.
2-bis. Pending the establishment of the hydrographic districts referred to in Title II of the Third Part of this decree and the revision of the related legislative discipline with a corrective legislative decree, the basin authorities under Law no. 183 of 18 May 1989, are extended until the date of entry into force of the corrective decree which, pursuant to article 1, paragraph 6, of Law no. 308 of 2004, defines the related discipline.*
3. For the purposes of applying the third part of this decree:
a) until the issuance of the decrees referred to in article 95, paragraphs 4 and 5, the ministerial decree of 28 July 2004 continues to apply;
b) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 99, paragraph 1, the ministerial decree no. 185 of 12 June 2003 continues to apply;
c) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 104, paragraph 4, the ministerial decree of 28 July 1994 applies;
d) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 112, paragraph 2, the ministerial decree of 6 July 2005 applies;
e) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 114, paragraph 4, the ministerial decree of 30 June 2004 continues to apply;
f) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 118, paragraph 2, the ministerial decree of 18 September 2002 and the ministerial decree of 19 August 2003 continue to apply;
g) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 123, paragraph 2, the ministerial decree of 19 August 2003 continues to apply;
h) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 146, paragraph 3, the ministerial decree no. 99 of 8 January 1997 continues to apply;
i) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 150, paragraph 2, the entrustment of the concession for the management of the integrated water service as well as the entrustment to mixed companies, the ministerial decree of 22 November 2001, as well as the circulars of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea of 6 December 2004, continue to apply;
l) until the issuance of the decree referred to in article 154, paragraph 2, the ministerial decree of 1 August 1996 continues to apply.
4. The third part of this decree contains the rules for transposing the following Community directives:
a) Directive 75/440/EEC on the quality of surface water intended for the production of drinking water;
b) Directive 76/464/EEC on pollution caused by certain dangerous substances discharged into the aquatic environment;
c) Directive 78/659/EEC on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life;
d) Directive 79/869/EEC concerning the methods of measurement and frequencies of sampling and analysis of surface water intended for the production of drinking water;
e) Directive 79/923/EEC on the quality required of shellfish waters;
f) Directive 80/68/EEC on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain dangerous substances;
g) Directive 82/176/EEC on limit values and quality objectives for mercury discharges by the chlor-alkali electrolysis industry;
h) Directive 83/513/EEC on limit values and quality objectives for cadmium discharges;
i) Directive 84/156/EEC on limit values and quality objectives for mercury discharges by sectors other than the chlor-alkali electrolysis industry;
l) Directive 84/491/EEC on limit values and quality objectives for discharges of hexachlorocyclohexane;
m) Directive 88/347/EEC amending Annex 11 to Directive 86/280/EEC concerning the limit values and quality objectives for discharges of certain dangerous substances included in list 1 of the Annex to Directive 76/464/EEC;
n) Directive 90/415/EEC amending Directive 86/280/EEC concerning the limit values and quality objectives for discharges of certain dangerous substances included in list 1 of Directive 76/464/EEC;
o) Directive 91/271/EEC concerning urban waste-water treatment;
p) Directive 91/676/EEC concerning the protection of waters against pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources;
q) Directive 98/15/EC amending Directive 91/271/EEC with regard to certain requirements of Annex 1;
r) Directive 2000/60/EC, establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy.
5. The regions shall define, in terms of no less than two years, the timeframes for adaptation to the prescriptions, including those adopted pursuant to article 101, paragraph 2, contained in the regional legislation implementing the third part of this decree and in the protection plans referred to in article 121.
6. The provisions of art. 36 of Law no. 128 of 24 April 1998, and of the legislative decrees implementing Directive 96/92/EC remain unaffected.
7. Until the issuance of the regional discipline referred to in article 112, the activities of agronomic utilization shall be carried out according to the regional provisions in force at the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree.
8. The implementation of the third part of this decree shall not result in new or increased charges or reduced revenues for public finance.
9. A share of not less than ten percent and not more than fifteen percent of the allocations provided for by state financing provisions is reserved for monitoring and study activities aimed at the implementation of the third part of this decree.
10. The provisions regarding the defense of the sea remain unaffected.
11. Until the issuance of corresponding acts adopted in implementation of the third part of this decree, the provisions and acts issued in implementation of the laws repealed by article 175 remain valid and effective.
12. The burden deriving from the establishment and functioning of the Section for the supervision of water resources is covered by using the resources referred to in art. 22, paragraph 6, of Law no. 36 of 5 January 1994.
13. The burden deriving from the establishment and functioning of the Section for the supervision of waste, equal to one million two hundred and forty thousand euros, updated annually in relation to the inflation rate, is covered by the National Packaging Consortium referred to in article 224 with a contribution of an equal amount charged to the consortia members. Said sums are paid by the National Packaging Consortium to the State budget entry to be reallocated by decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance to a specific chapter of the budget forecast of the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea.
14. In the first application, the term of one hundred and eighty days referred to in article 112, paragraph 2, shall run from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree.
NOTE: "paragraph 2-bis" was inserted by Legislative Decree no. 284/2006 of 8 November (G.U. no. 274 of 24/11/2006). Art. 1 paragraph 4 of Legislative Decree no. 284 of 8 November 2006 thus provides: "Until the date of entry into force of the corrective legislative decree referred to in paragraph 2-bis of article 170 of legislative decree no. 152 of 3 April 2006, as inserted by paragraph 3, the acts put in place by the basin authorities from 30 April 2006 are saved"

Art. 171
Fees for the use of public water
Pending the transfer of the water domain to the Sicily region, for large derivations undergoing regularization pursuant to article 96, paragraph 6, located in the territory of that region, the following annual fees shall apply retroactively, starting from 1 January 2002:
a) for each module of water granted for irrigation use, 40.00 euros, reduced by half if the seepage and residual water are returned, including to the aquifer;
b) for each hectare of the irrigated district granted, with a derivation not subject to fixed-rate measurement, 0.40 euros;
c) for each module of water granted for human consumption, 1,750.00 euros, minimum 300.00 euros;
d) for each module of water granted for industrial use, 12,600.00 euros, minimum 1,750.00 euros. The fee is reduced by fifty percent if the concessionaire implements a reuse of water by re-employing the water resulting downstream of the production process or a part of it, or, again, if it returns the discharge water with the same qualitative characteristics as that withdrawn. The provisions of paragraph 5 of article 12 of decree-law no. 90 of 27 April 1990, converted, with modifications, by law no. 1651 of 26 June 1990, do not apply for industrial use;
e) for each module of water granted for fish farming, irrigation of sports facilities and public green areas, 300.00 euros, minimum 100.00 euros;
f) for each kilowatt of nominal power granted, for hydroelectric use derivation concessions, 12.00 euros, minimum 100.00 euros;
g) for each module of water granted for hygienic and similar use, concerning the use of water for hygienic and fire-fighting services, including that related to sports facilities, industries, and various structures where the concession only concerns such use, for car washing and road washing facilities, and in any case for all uses not provided for in letters from a) to f), 900.00 euros.
The amounts of the fees referred to in paragraph 1 may not be less than 250.00 euros for derivations for human consumption and 1,500.00 euros for derivations for industrial use.
Art. 172
Existing management
The Area Authorities that, at the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, have already proceeded with the drafting of the area plan, without having chosen the form of management and started the entrustment procedures, are required, within the six months following that date, to deliberate the aforementioned provisions.
In relation to the expiry of the term referred to in paragraph 15-bis of article 113 of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000, the Area Authority shall arrange for the new entrustments, in compliance with the third part of this decree, within the sixty days preceding that expiry.
If the Area Authority does not proceed with the fulfillments referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 within the terms established therein, the region, within thirty days, shall exercise, giving communication to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), the substitute powers, appointing an "ad acta" commissioner, whose expenses are charged to the defaulting entity, who starts the entrustment procedures within thirty days, determining the deadlines for the individual procedural fulfillments. If the regional commissioner does not proceed within the terms so established, the substitute powers aimed at completing the entrustment procedure fall to the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea.
If the local authorities do not join the Area Authorities pursuant to article 148 within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the region shall exercise, after warning the local authority to comply within the term of thirty days and giving communication to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), the substitute powers, appointing an "ad acta" commissioner, whose expenses are charged to the defaulting entity.
Upon expiry, or early termination, of the managements in place pursuant to paragraph 2, the assets and plants of the already concessionaire companies are transferred directly to the granting local authority within the limits and according to the methods provided for in the convention.
The aqueduct, sewerage, and purification plants managed by the consortia for the industrial areas and nuclei referred to in article 50 of the single text of the laws on interventions in Southern Italy, approved by decree of the President of the Republic no. 218 of 6 March 1978, by other consortia or public bodies, in compliance with the management unit, are transferred by 31 December 2006 in use concession to the manager of the integrated water service of the Optimal Territorial Area in which all or the majority of the served territories fall, according to a plan adopted by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, having heard the regions, the provinces, and the interested entities.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."
Art. 173
Personnel
Without prejudice to the regional legislation adopted pursuant to art. 12, paragraph 3, of Law no. 36 of 5 January 1994, the personnel who, as of 31 December 2005 or in any case eight months before the entrustment of the service, belong to the municipal administrations, to the former municipal or consortium companies and to private companies, including cooperatives, that operate in the water services sector shall be subject, without prejudice to the termination of the employment relationship, to direct and immediate transfer to the new manager of the integrated water service, with the safeguarding of the contractual, collective and individual conditions in place. In the case of transfer of employees of public entities and former municipal or consortium companies and of private companies, including cooperatives, to the manager of the integrated water service, the discipline of the transfer of a business branch referred to in art. 2112 of the civil code applies, pursuant to article 31 of Legislative Decree no. 165 of 30 March 2001.
Art. 174
Implementation and execution provisions
Until the adoption by the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea of new implementing provisions of the third section of the third part of this decree, the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 4 March 1996, published in the Official Gazette no. 62 of 14 March 1994, applies.
The Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, having heard the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*) and the permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, within one year from the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, within the framework of specific institutional agreements, shall prepare a specific program for the achievement, without additional charges for the Ministry, of the purification levels, as defined by directive 91/271/EEC, activating the substitute powers of article 152 in the optimal territorial areas where there are agglomerations for which infringement procedures are pending for violation of the cited directive.
(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."
Art. 175
Repeal of norms
From the date of entry into force of the third part of this decree, the norms contrary to or incompatible with it are or remain repealed, and in particular:
a) art. 42, third paragraph, of Royal Decree no. 1775 of 11 December 1933, as amended by article 8 of Legislative Decree no. 275 of 12 July 1993;
b) Law no. 319 of 10 May 1976;
c) Law no. 690 of 8 October 1976, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 544 of 10 August 1976;
d) Law no. 650 of 24 December 1979;
e) Law no. 62 of 5 March 1982, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 801 of 30 December 1981;
f) decree of the President of the Republic no. 515 of 3 July 1982;
g) Law no. 381 of 25 July 1984, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 176 of 29 May 1984;
h) articles 5, 6, and 7 of Law no. 7 of 24 January 1986, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 667 of 25 November 1985;
i) articles 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 236 of 24 May 1988;
l) Law no. 183 of 18 May 1989;
m) articles 4 and 5 of Law no. 71 of 5 April 1990, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 16 of 5 February 1990;
n) art. 32 of Law no. 9 of 9 January 1991;
o) Legislative Decree no. 130 of 25 January 1992;
p) Legislative Decree no. 131 of 27 January 1992;
q) Legislative Decree no. 132 of 27 January 1992;
r) Legislative Decree no. 133 of 27 January 1992;
s) art. 12 of Legislative Decree no. 275 of 12 July 1993;
t) article 2, paragraph 1, of Law no. 502 of 6 December 1993, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 408 of 9 October 1993;
u) Law no. 36 of 5 January 1994, with the exclusion of article 22, paragraph 6;
v) article 9-bis of Law no. 642 of 20 December 1996, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 552 of 23 October 1996;
z) Law no. 172 of 17 May 1995, converting, with modifications, decree-law no. 79 of 17 March 1995;
aa) art. 1 of decree-law no. 180 of 11 June 1998, converted, with modifications, by Law no. 267 of 3 August 1998;
bb) Legislative Decree no. 152 of 11 May 1999, as amended by Legislative Decree no. 258 of 18 August 2000;
cc) art. 1-bis of decree-law no. 279 of 12 October 2000, converted, with modifications, by Law no. 365 of 11 October 2000.
Art. 176
Final norm
The provisions of the third part of this decree that concern matters of concurrent legislation constitute fundamental principles pursuant to article 117, paragraph 3, of the Constitution.
The provisions of the third part of this decree are applicable in the special statute regions and in the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano compatibly with the norms of their respective statutes.
For the waters belonging to the water domain of the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, the competencies regarding the use of public waters and regarding hydraulic works provided for by the special statute of the Trentino-Alto Adige region and by the relative implementation norms remain unaffected.
PART FOUR - NORMS ON WASTE MANAGEMENT AND REMEDIATION OF CONTAMINATED SITES
Note: Paragraph 184 of art. 1 of the 2007 Finance Act is reported below:
"184. Pending the full implementation of the provisions laid down by Legislative Decree no. 152 of 3 April 2006, and subsequent amendments:
a) the levy regime relating to the waste collection and disposal service adopted in each municipality for the year 2006 shall remain unchanged also for the year 2007;
b) regarding the assimilation of special waste to urban waste, the provisions of articles 18, paragraph 2, letter d), and 57, paragraph 1, of Legislative Decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997 (...) continue to apply"
TITLE I - WASTE MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Art. 177
Scope of application
The fourth part of this decree regulates waste management and the remediation of contaminated sites, also in implementation of the community directives on waste, on hazardous waste, on used oils, on spent batteries, on packaging waste, on polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), on landfills, on incinerators, on electrical and electronic waste, on port waste, on end-of-life vehicles, on sanitary waste and on waste containing asbestos. Specific, particular, or complementary provisions, conforming to the principles of the fourth part of this decree, adopted in implementation of community directives that regulate the management of certain categories of waste, are unaffected.
The regions and autonomous provinces shall adapt their respective legal systems to the provisions on environmental and ecosystem protection contained in the fourth part of this decree within one year from the date of its entry into force.
Art. 178
Purpose
Waste management constitutes an activity of public interest and is regulated by the fourth part of this decree in order to ensure a high level of environmental protection and effective controls, taking into account the specificity of hazardous waste.
Waste must be recovered or disposed of without danger to human health and without using processes or methods that could harm the environment, and, in particular:
a) without creating risks for water, air, soil, as well as for fauna and flora;
b) without causing nuisance from noise or odors;
c) without damaging the landscape and sites of particular interest, protected on the basis of current legislation.
Waste management is carried out in accordance with the principles of precaution, prevention, proportionality, responsibility, and cooperation of all subjects involved in the production, distribution, use, and consumption of goods from which waste originates, in compliance with the principles of the national and community legal system, with particular reference to the community principle "polluter pays". To this end, waste management is carried out according to criteria of effectiveness, efficiency, economy, and transparency.
To achieve the purposes and objectives of the fourth part of this decree, the State, the regions, the autonomous provinces, and the local authorities shall exercise the powers and functions of their respective competence in waste management in accordance with the provisions of the fourth part of this decree, adopting every appropriate action and availing themselves, where appropriate, through agreements, program contracts or experimental memoranda of understanding, of public or private subjects.
The subjects referred to in paragraph 4 also constitute a complete and synergistic system that harmonizes, in a unitary context, relatively to the objectives to be pursued, the drafting of technical standards, accreditation systems, and certification systems relating directly or indirectly to environmental matters, with particular reference to waste management, according to the criteria and with the methods of article 195, paragraph 2, letter a), and in compliance with the information procedures in the sector of technical standards and regulations and of the rules relating to the services of the information society, provided for by the community directives and related implementation norms, with particular reference to Law no. 317 of 21 June 1986.

Art. 179
Priority criteria in waste management
Public administrations shall pursue, in the exercise of their respective competencies, initiatives aimed at giving priority to the prevention and reduction of the production and harmfulness of waste, in particular through:
a) the development of clean technologies that allow a more rational use and a greater saving of natural resources;
b) the technical development and placing on the market of products designed so as not to contribute or to contribute as little as possible, through their manufacture, use, or disposal, to increasing the quantity or harmfulness of waste and the risks of pollution;
c) the development of appropriate techniques for the elimination of hazardous substances contained in waste in order to facilitate its recovery.
In compliance with the priority measures referred to in paragraph 1, public administrations shall also adopt measures aimed at the recovery of waste through recycling, reuse, reutilization, or any other action intended to obtain secondary raw materials, as well as the use of waste as a source of energy.
Art. 180
Prevention of waste production
In order to promote as a priority the prevention and reduction of the production and harmfulness of waste, the initiatives of article 179 concern in particular:
a) the promotion of economic instruments, eco-balances, environmental certification systems, life cycle analysis of products, information and consumer awareness actions, the use of quality systems, as well as the development of the ecological label system for the correct evaluation of the impact of a specific product on the environment during the entire life cycle of the product itself;
b) the provision of tender clauses that enhance the technical capabilities and skills in waste production prevention;
c) the promotion of agreements and program contracts or experimental memoranda of understanding aimed at, with improving effects, the prevention and reduction of the quantity and hazardousness of waste;
d) the implementation of Legislative Decree no. 59 of 18 February 2005, and of the other decrees transposing Directive 96/61/EC on integrated pollution prevention and reduction.
Art. 181
Recovery of waste
For the purpose of proper waste management, public administrations shall favor the reduction of the final disposal of waste through:
a) reuse, re-employment, and recycling;
b) other forms of recovery to obtain secondary raw materials from waste;
c) the adoption of economic measures and the provision of contract conditions that prescribe the use of materials recovered from waste in order to favor the market for such materials;
d) the use of waste as a means to produce energy.
In order to favor and increase the activities of reuse, re-employment, and recycling and the adoption of other forms of recovery of waste, public administrations and producers shall promote analyses of the life cycles of products, eco-balances, information campaigns, and all other useful initiatives.
Companies that intend to modify their production cycles in order to reduce the quantity and hazardousness of the waste produced or to favor the recovery of materials are granted priority access to the benefits from the special revolving fund for technological innovation, provided for by articles 14 and following of Law no. 46 of 17 February 1982. The methods, times, and procedures for the granting and disbursement of the aforementioned benefits are established by decree of the Minister of Productive Activities, in concert with the Ministers of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, of Economy and Finance, and of Health.
Public administrations shall promote and stipulate program agreements and contracts with the interested economic subjects or with the category associations representing the interested sectors, in order to favor the reuse, re-employment, recycling, and other forms of recovery of waste, as well as the use of secondary raw materials, of fuels or products obtained from the recovery of waste from separate collection. In compliance with the principles and criteria provided for by community norms and national transposition norms, said agreements and program contracts shall implement the provisions of the fourth part of this decree, in addition to establishing simplifications in administrative fulfillments in compliance with community norms and with the eventual recourse to economic instruments.
The agreements and program contracts of paragraph 4 are published in the Official Gazette and are open to the accession of interested subjects, in accordance with the communication of the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council and the Committee of the Regions, Com (2002) 412 final of 17 July 2002, on the basis of which the Commission may also use them in the context of self-regulation, understood as encouragement or recognition of the agreements themselves, or co-regulation, understood as a proposal to the legislator to use the agreements, where appropriate.
The methods of recovery of waste used to obtain secondary raw materials, fuels or products must guarantee the obtaining of materials with characteristics established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, pursuant to art. 17, paragraph 3, of Law no. 400 of 23 August 1988. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the ministerial decree of 5 February 1998 and of the decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea no. 161 of 12 June 2002 continue to apply. The aforesaid characteristics may also comply with the authorizations issued pursuant to articles 208, 209, and 210 of this decree.
In compliance with the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5, and 6 of this article, the interested economic subjects or the category associations representing the interested sectors, including with reference to entire economic and productive sectors, may stipulate with the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities and after hearing the opinion of the Economic and Social Council for Environmental Policies (CESPA), specific program agreements pursuant to paragraph 4 and article 206 to define the methods of recovery of waste intended for obtaining secondary raw materials, fuels, or products. The agreements shall establish the administrative procedures and fulfillments for the collection, for the reservation, for the transport of waste, for their commercialization, including through the telematic market, with particular reference to that of the recovery realized by the Chambers of Commerce, and for the controls of the characteristics and the relative testing methods; the same agreements shall also establish the characteristics of the secondary raw materials, fuels or products obtained, as well as the methods to ensure in any case their traceability until entry into the plant of effective use.
The proposal for a program agreement, with indication also of the methods used for the transport and for the use of the secondary raw materials, or the request for adhesion to an agreement already in force must be submitted to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, who avails himself for the investigation of the National Committee of the Register referred to in article 212 and of the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), which avails itself of the Regional Agencies for the Protection of the Environment (ARPA). On the proposal for an agreement, the opinion of the Authority referred to in article 207 is also acquired.
The agreements referred to in paragraph 7 must also contain, for each type of activity, the general norms that establish the types and quantities of waste and the conditions under which the waste recovery activity is exempted from authorization, in compliance with the conditions set by article 178, paragraph 2.
The signatories of the agreements provided for in this article are registered in a special section to be established at the Register referred to in article 212, upon simple written request, and without being subject to the financial guarantees of paragraphs 7 and 9 of the cited article 212.
The program agreements referred to in paragraph 7 are approved, for the purpose of their effectiveness, by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities and with the Minister of Health, and are subsequently published in the Official Gazette. Such agreements are open to the accession of all interested subjects.
The discipline on waste management applies until the completion of the recovery operations, which is realized when no further treatments are necessary for the substances, materials, and objects obtained to be used in an industrial or commercial process or marketed as a secondary raw material, fuel, or as a product to be placed, provided that the holder does not dispose of it or has not decided, or has no obligation, to dispose of it.
The discipline on waste management does not apply to materials, substances or objects that, without the need for transformation operations, already have the characteristics of secondary raw materials, fuels or products identified pursuant to this article, unless the holder disposes of them or has decided, or has the obligation, to dispose of them.
The subjects who transport or use secondary raw materials, fuels or products, in compliance with the provisions of this article, are not subject to the legislation on waste, unless they dispose of them or have decided, or have the obligation, to dispose of them.
Art. 182
Waste disposal
The disposal of waste is carried out in safe conditions and constitutes the residual phase of waste management, after verification, by the competent authority, of the technical and economic impossibility of carrying out the recovery operations referred to in article 181. To this end, the aforesaid verification concerns the availability of technologies developed on a scale that allows their application in economically and technically valid conditions in the relevant industrial sector, taking into consideration the costs and benefits, regardless of whether they are applied or produced domestically, provided they can be accessed under reasonable conditions.
Waste to be sent for final disposal must be reduced as much as possible both in mass and in volume, enhancing prevention and reuse, recycling, and recovery activities.
The disposal of waste is carried out with recourse to an integrated and adequate network of disposal plants, through the best available techniques and taking into account the relationship between the costs and the overall benefits, in order to:
a) achieve self-sufficiency in the disposal of non-hazardous urban waste in optimal territorial areas;
b) allow the disposal of waste in one of the most appropriate plants closest to the places of production or collection, in order to reduce the movements of the waste itself, taking into account the geographical context or the need for specialized plants for certain types of waste;
c) use the most suitable methods and technologies to guarantee a high degree of protection for the environment and public health.
In compliance with the prescriptions contained in Legislative Decree no. 133 of 11 May 2005, the construction and management of new plants can be authorized only if the relative combustion process is accompanied by energy recovery with a minimum quota of transformation of the calorific value of the waste into useful energy, calculated on an annual basis, established with appropriate technical norms approved by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, taking into account any existing sector technical norms, including at the community level.
It is forbidden to dispose of non-hazardous urban waste in regions other than those where it is produced, without prejudice to any regional or international agreements, if the territorial aspects and the technical-economic opportunity of reaching optimal levels of user service require it. The fractions of urban waste subject to separate collection intended for recovery are excluded from the ban, for which free circulation on the national territory is always permitted in order to favor their recovery as much as possible, privileging the concept of proximity to the recovery plants.
The disposal of waste in the sewer system is regulated by article 107, paragraph 3.
The activities of waste disposal in landfills are regulated according to the provisions of Legislative Decree no. 36 of 13 January 2003, implementing Directive 1999/31/EC.
The disposal of the biodegradable fraction obtained from the physical separation treatment of the residual fraction of solid urban waste is permitted within the wastewater treatment plants after a technical check of the plants by the managing body.
Art. 183
Definitions
For the purposes of the fourth part of this decree and without prejudice to the further definitions contained in the special provisions, it is intended by:
a) waste: any substance or object that falls into the categories listed in Annex A to the fourth part of this decree and of which the holder disposes or has decided or has the obligation to dispose;
b) producer: the person whose activity has produced waste, i.e., the initial producer, and the person who has carried out pretreatment, mixing, or other operations that have changed the nature or composition of said waste;
c) holder: the producer of the waste or the subject who holds it;
d) management: the collection, transport, recovery, and disposal of waste, including the control of these operations, as well as the control of landfills after closure;
e) collection: the operation of withdrawal, sorting, or grouping of waste for its transport;
f) separate collection: the collection suitable, according to criteria of economy, effectiveness, transparency, and efficiency, to group urban waste into homogeneous commodity fractions, at the time of collection or, for the wet organic fraction, also at the time of treatment, as well as to group packaging waste separately from other urban waste, provided that all the above-mentioned waste is effectively destined for recovery.
g) disposal: any operation aimed at permanently removing a substance, a material, or an object from the economic and/or collection circuit and, in particular, the operations provided for in Annex B to the fourth part of this decree;
h) recovery: the operations that use waste to generate secondary raw materials, fuels, or products, through mechanical, thermal, chemical, or biological treatments, including sorting or selection, and, in particular, the operations provided for in Annex C to the fourth part of this decree;
i) place of waste production: one or more buildings or establishments or infrastructural sites connected to each other within a delimited area in which the production activities from which the waste originated are carried out;
l) storage: the disposal activities consisting of the preliminary deposit operations of waste referred to in point D 15 of Annex B to the fourth part of this decree, as well as the recovery activities consisting of the reservation operations of materials referred to in point R13 of Annex C to the same fourth part;
m) temporary storage: the grouping of waste carried out, before collection, at the place where it is produced, under the following conditions:
the stored waste must not contain polychlorodibenzodioxins, polychlorodibenzofurans, polychlorodibenzophenols in quantities exceeding 2.5 parts per million (ppm), nor polychlorobiphenyls and polychlorotriphenyls in quantities exceeding 25 parts per million (ppm);
hazardous waste must be collected and sent for recovery or disposal operations according to the following alternative methods, at the producer's choice:
2.1) at least every two months, regardless of the quantities in storage; or
2.2) when the quantity of hazardous waste in storage reaches 10 cubic meters. In any case, when the quantity of waste does not exceed 10 cubic meters per year, the temporary storage cannot last more than one year; or
2.3) limited to temporary storage carried out in establishments located on the smaller islands, within the maximum duration of one year, regardless of the quantities;
non-hazardous waste must be collected and sent for recovery or disposal operations according to the following alternative methods, at the producer's choice:
3.1) at least every three months, regardless of the quantities in storage; or
3.2) when the quantity of non-hazardous waste in storage reaches 20 cubic meters. In any case, when the quantity of waste does not exceed 20 cubic meters per year, the temporary storage cannot last more than one year; or
3.3) limited to temporary storage carried out in establishments located on the smaller islands, within the maximum duration of one year, regardless of the quantities;
the temporary storage must be carried out for homogeneous categories of waste and in compliance with the relative technical norms, as well as, for hazardous waste, in compliance with the norms that regulate the storage of the hazardous substances contained therein;
the norms that regulate the packaging and labeling of hazardous waste must be respected;
n) by-product: the products of the company's activity which, although not constituting the object of the main activity, arise continuously from the industrial process of the company itself and are intended for a further use or consumption. The by-products of which the company does not dispose, is not obliged to dispose, and has not decided to dispose, and in particular the by-products used directly by the company that produces them or marketed under economically favorable conditions for the company itself directly for consumption or use, without the need to carry out preliminary transformations in a subsequent production process, are not subject to the provisions of the fourth part of this decree; for this purpose, for preliminary transformation is meant any operation that causes the by-product to lose its identity, i.e., the commodity quality characteristics and the properties it already possesses, and which is necessary for its subsequent use in a production process or for consumption. The use of the by-product must be certain and not eventual. Also included among the by-products not subject to the provisions of the fourth part of this decree are pyrite cinders, iron oxide powders, from the process of roasting the mineral known as pyrite or iron sulfide for the production of sulfuric acid and iron oxide, deposited at disused production plants, industrial and non-industrial areas, even if subjected to a remediation or environmental restoration procedure. In order to guarantee a certain use of the by-product, compliance with commodity standards, as well as with technical, safety, and sector norms must be verified and the destination of the by-product for effective use based on these standards and norms must be attested through a declaration of the producer or holder, countersigned by the owner of the plant where the effective use takes place. The use of the by-product must not entail worse conditions for the environment or health compared to those of normal production activities;
o) wet fraction: putrescible organic waste with a high moisture content, from separate collection or selection or treatment of urban waste;
p) dry fraction: waste with low putrescibility and low moisture content from separate collection or selection or treatment of urban waste, having a significant energy content;
q) secondary raw material: substance or material having the characteristics established pursuant to article 181;
r) refuse-derived fuel (RDF): the fuel classifiable, on the basis of the technical standards UNI 9903-1 and subsequent modifications and integrations, as normal quality RDF, which is recovered from urban and special non-hazardous waste through treatments aimed at guaranteeing a calorific value suitable for its use, as well as to reduce and control:
the environmental and health risk;
the presence of metallic material, glass, inert materials, putrescible material, and the moisture content;
the presence of hazardous substances, in particular for the purpose of combustion;
s) high-quality refuse-derived fuel (CDR-Q): the fuel classifiable, on the basis of the technical standards UNI 9903-1 and subsequent modifications and integrations, as high-quality RDF, to which article 229 applies;
t) compost from waste: product obtained from the composting of the organic fraction of urban waste in compliance with specific technical norms aimed at defining its contents and uses compatible with environmental and health protection and, in particular, at defining its quality grades;
u) secondary raw material for steel and metallurgical activities whose use is certain and not eventual:
ferrous and non-ferrous scrap resulting from complete recovery operations and meeting Ceca, Aisi, Caef, Uni, Euro or other national and international specifications, identified within one hundred and eighty days from the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, not having a regulatory nature;
scrap or waste from industrial or artisanal processing or from production or consumption cycles, excluding separate collection, which originally possess the same characteristics reported in the specifications of number 1). The suppliers and producers of secondary raw material for steel activities belonging to foreign countries shall apply for registration with the National Register of Environmental Managers, pursuant to article 212, paragraph 12, within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the ministerial decree of number 1);
v) manager of the waste management and site remediation service: the company that carries out the waste management service, also produced by third parties, and the remediation of contaminated sites by resorting to, and coordinating, other companies possessing the legal requirements for the performance of individual parts of the service itself. The company that intends to carry out the waste management and site remediation activity must be registered in the categories of waste intermediation and site remediation of the Register referred to in article 212 as well as in the category of general works of remediation and environmental protection established by Annex A attached to the regulation referred to in the decree of the President of the Republic no. 34 of 25 January 2000;
z) emissions: any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance introduced into the atmosphere that may cause atmospheric pollution;
aa) water discharges: any discharge of wastewater into surface waters, on the ground, in the subsoil, and in the sewer network, regardless of their polluting nature, even if subjected to prior purification treatment;
bb) atmospheric pollution: any atmospheric modification due to the introduction into the air of one or more substances in quantities and with characteristics such as to harm or constitute a danger to human health or to the quality of the environment or such as to harm material goods or compromise the legitimate uses of the environment;
cc) integrated waste management: the complex of activities aimed at optimizing waste management, including the activity of street sweeping, as defined in letter d);
dd) street sweeping: method of collecting waste on the street.

Art. 184
Classification
For the purposes of implementing the fourth part of this decree, waste is classified, according to its origin, into urban waste and special waste and, according to its hazardous characteristics, into hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste.
Urban waste is:
a) domestic waste, including bulky waste, from premises and places used for civil housing;
b) non-hazardous waste from premises and places used for uses other than those of letter a), assimilated to urban waste for quality and quantity, pursuant to article 198, paragraph 2, letter g);
c) waste from street sweeping;
d) waste of any nature or origin, lying on public roads and areas or on private roads and areas in any case subject to public use or on sea and lake beaches and on the banks of watercourses;
e) plant waste from green areas, such as gardens, parks, and cemetery areas;
f) waste from exhumations and disinterments, as well as other waste from cemetery activities other than those of letters b), c), and e).
Special waste is:
a) waste from agricultural and agro-industrial activities;
b) waste deriving from demolition, construction activities, as well as hazardous waste deriving from excavation activities, without prejudice to the provisions of article 186;
c) waste from industrial processing, without prejudice to the provisions of article 185, paragraph 1, letter i);
d) waste from artisanal processing;
e) waste from commercial activities;
f) waste from service activities;
g) waste deriving from the activity of recovery and disposal of waste, sludge produced by the potabilization and other treatments of water and by the purification of wastewater and from the abatement of fumes;
h) waste deriving from sanitary activities;
i) deteriorated and obsolete machinery and equipment;
l) end-of-life motor vehicles, trailers and the like and their parts;
m) fuel derived from waste;
n) waste derived from the mechanical selection activities of solid urban waste.
By decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, the list of waste is established, in accordance with art. 1, paragraph 1, letter a), of Directive 75/442/EEC and art. 1, paragraph 4, of Directive 91/689/EC, of which Commission Decision 2000/532/EC of 3 May 2000. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the directive of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea of 9 April 2002, published in the Ordinary Supplement to the Official Gazette no. 108 of 10 May 2002 and reported in Annex D to the fourth part of this decree, continue to apply.
Non-domestic waste expressly indicated as such, with a specific asterisk, in the list of Annex D to the fourth part of this decree, on the basis of Annexes G, H, and I to the same fourth part, is hazardous.
Art. 185
Limits to the scope of application
The following do not fall within the scope of application of the fourth part of this decree:
a) emissions consisting of gaseous effluents emitted into the atmosphere as per article 183, paragraph 1, letter z);
b) water discharges, excluding liquid waste consisting of wastewater;
c) radioactive waste;
d) waste resulting from prospecting, extraction, treatment, storage of mineral resources or from the exploitation of quarries;
e) carcasses and the following agricultural waste: faecal matter and other natural non-hazardous substances used in agricultural activities and in particular lithoid or plant materials and cultivation soil, including in the form of sludge, from the cleaning and washing of plant products reused in normal agricultural practices and for the management of rural lands, even after treatment in farm and inter-farm agricultural plants that reduce the polluting and potentially pathogenic loads of the starting materials;
f) surpluses from the preparation in kitchens of any type of solid, cooked, and raw foods, not entered into the distribution circuit of administration, intended for the shelter facilities for pets as per Law no. 281 of 14 August 1991, in compliance with the current legislation;
g) disused explosive materials;
h) plant materials not contaminated by pollutants from drainage and irrigation ditches, usable as such as a product, in a measure exceeding the limits established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea to be issued within ninety days from the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the limits of the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 471 of 25 October 1999 continue to apply;
i) petroleum coke used as fuel for productive use;
l) lithoid material extracted from watercourses, water basins, and riverbeds, following maintenance ordered by the competent authorities;
m) weapon systems, means, materials, and infrastructures directly intended for military defense and national security identified by decree of the Minister of Defense, as well as the management of materials and waste and the remediation of the sites where the cited materials are stored, which remain regulated by the special sector norms in respect of the principles of environmental protection provided for by the fourth part of this decree. The warehouses, deposits, and storage sites where the same materials and waste are kept constitute works intended for military defense not subject to the authorizations and clearances provided for by the fourth part of this decree;
n) materials and infrastructures not included in the ministerial decree of letter m), until the provision of declaration of waste is issued pursuant to the decree of the President of the Republic no. 1076 of 5 June 1976, containing the regulation for the administration and accounting of the organisms of the army, the navy, and the air force.
The discipline of which Regulation (EC) no. 1774/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 October 2002, laying down health rules concerning animal by-products not intended for human consumption, which constitutes exhaustive and autonomous discipline in the scope of application indicated therein, remains unaffected.
Art. 186
Excavated earth and rock
Excavated earth and rock, including from tunnels, and the residues from stone processing intended for effective use for backfills, fillings, embankments, and ground materials do not constitute waste and are, therefore, excluded from the scope of application of the fourth part of this decree only in the case where, even when contaminated, during the production cycle, by polluting substances deriving from excavation, drilling, and construction activities, they are used, without preliminary transformations, according to the methods provided for in the project submitted to environmental impact assessment or, if the project is not subject to environmental impact assessment, according to the methods provided for in the project approved by the competent administrative authority, where this is expressly provided, after the opinion of the regional and autonomous province agencies for environmental protection, provided that the average composition of the entire mass does not present a concentration of pollutants higher than the maximum limits provided for by the current norms and by the decree of paragraph 3.
For the purposes of this article, the works whose project is subject to environmental impact assessment constitute a single production cycle, even if the materials of paragraph 1 are intended for different uses, provided that these uses are all provided for in the project.
The respect of the limits of paragraph 1 can be verified, as an alternative to the assessments on the production site, also through assessments on the deposit sites, in case of impossibility of immediate use. The maximum acceptable limits as well as the analysis methods of the materials for their characterization, to be performed according to the criteria of Annex 2 of Title V of the fourth part of this decree, are determined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea to be issued within ninety days from the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, unless lower limits are provided for by special provisions. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the acceptable limit concentration values of Annex 1, table 1, column B, of the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 471 of 25 October 1999 continue to apply.
The respect of the maximum concentration limits of pollutants of paragraph 3 must be verified through characterization activities of the materials of paragraph 1, to be repeated whenever variations in the production process that originates such materials occur.
For the materials of paragraph 1, for effective use for backfills, fillings, embankments, and ground materials is also intended the destination provided for in the project to different industrial production cycles, as well as the filling of cultivated quarries, or the relocation to another site, for any reason authorized by the competent administrative authority, if this is expressly provided, after, where the relative project is not subject to environmental impact assessment, the opinion of the regional and autonomous province agencies for environmental protection, provided that the limits of paragraph 3 are respected and the relocation is carried out according to project methods of environmental reshaping of the interested territory.
If the materials of paragraph 1 are intended for different industrial production cycles, the administrative authorities competent to exercise the functions of surveillance and control over the same cycles shall verify, without additional charges for public finance, also by carrying out periodic checks, the effective destination for the authorized use of the materials; to this end, the user is required to document their origin, quantity, and specific destination.
For the purposes of the opinion of the regional and autonomous province agencies for environmental protection, of which paragraphs 1 and 5, for projects not subject to environmental impact assessment, a declaration of the subject who carries out the works or of the client, made pursuant to article 47 of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 445 of 28 December 2000, is attached to the request for reuse pursuant to paragraphs 1 to 6, in which it is certified that in the execution of the works no polluting substances have been used, that the reuse occurs without preliminary transformations, that the reuse occurs for one of the works of paragraphs 1 and 5 of this article, as authorized by the competent authority, where this is expressly provided, and that in the excavated material the concentration of pollutants is not higher than the current limits with reference also to the destination site.
In the case where the immediate reuse of the excavated material is not possible, the deposit site of the material, the quantity, the typology of the material must also be indicated, and at the time of reuse, the request must be integrated with what is provided for in paragraphs 6 and 7. The reuse must occur within six months of the deposit, unless an extension is granted upon a motivated request from the interested party.
The opinion of paragraph 5 must be rendered within the peremptory term of thirty days, after which the region shall provide in a substitute capacity upon the request of the interested party.
Waste deriving from the processing of minerals and quarry materials is in no case assimilable to urban waste.

Art. 187
Prohibition of mixing hazardous waste
It is forbidden to mix different categories of hazardous waste of Annex G to the fourth part of this decree or hazardous waste with non-hazardous waste.
By way of derogation from the prohibition of paragraph 1, the mixing of hazardous waste with each other or with other waste, substances, or materials may be authorized pursuant to articles 208, 209, 210, and 211 if the conditions of article 178, paragraph 2, are met, and for the purpose of making the recovery and disposal of waste safer.
Without prejudice to the application of the specific sanctions and in particular those of article 256, paragraph 5, anyone who violates the prohibition of paragraph 1 is required to proceed at his own expense with the separation of the mixed waste if it is technically and economically possible and to satisfy the conditions of article 178, paragraph 2.
Art. 188
Burdens of producers and holders
The burdens relating to the disposal activities are borne by the holder who delivers the waste to an authorized collector or to a subject who carries out the disposal operations, as well as by the previous holders or by the producer of the waste.
The producer or holder of special waste shall fulfill his obligations with the following priorities:
a) self-disposal of the waste;
b) conferment of the waste to third parties authorized pursuant to the current provisions;
c) conferment of the waste to the subjects who manage the public collection service of urban waste, with whom a specific convention has been stipulated;
d) use of rail transport of hazardous waste for distances exceeding three hundred and fifty kilometers and quantities exceeding twenty-five tons;
e) exportation of the waste with the methods provided for in article 194.
The responsibility of the holder for the correct recovery or disposal of the waste is excluded:
a) in case of conferment of the waste to the public collection service;
b) in case of conferment of the waste to subjects authorized for the recovery or disposal activities, provided that the holder has received the form of which article 193 countersigned and dated upon arrival by the recipient within three months from the date of conferment of the waste to the transporter, or at the expiry of the aforesaid term has provided to give communication to the province of the non-receipt of the form. For cross-border shipments of waste, this term is increased to six months and the communication is made to the region.
In the case of conferment of waste to subjects authorized for the operations of grouping, repackaging, and preliminary storage, indicated respectively at points D 13, D 14, D 15 of Annex B to the fourth part of this decree, the responsibility of the producers of the waste for the correct disposal is excluded on condition that the latter, in addition to the transport form of paragraph 3, letter b), have received the certificate of occurred disposal issued by the holder of the plant that carries out the operations of which points from D 1 to D 12 of the cited Annex B. The relative implementation methods are defined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, which will also have to determine the responsibilities to be attributed to the waste intermediary.
Art. 189
Waste cadastre
The Waste Cadastre, established by art. 3 of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with modifications, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, is structured into a National Section, based in Rome at the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), and into Regional or autonomous province Sections of Trento and Bolzano at the corresponding Regional and autonomous province Agencies for the protection of the environment, and, where such Agencies are not yet established, at the region. The organization norms of the Cadastre are issued and updated by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, within sixty days of the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 372 of 4 August 1998 continue to apply. The implementation of this article shall not result in new or increased charges for public finance.
The Cadastre ensures a complete and constantly updated cognitive framework, also for the purposes of planning waste management activities, of the data collected pursuant to law no. 70 of 25 January 1994, using the nomenclature provided for in the European Catalogue of Waste, of which decision 94/3/EC of 20 December 1993.
Anyone who professionally carries out waste collection and transport activities, including waste traders and intermediaries without detention, or carries out waste recovery and disposal operations, as well as companies and entities that produce hazardous waste and the consortia established for the purpose of recovering particular types of waste, shall communicate annually to the territorially competent Chambers of Commerce, Industry, Handicraft, and Agriculture, with the methods provided for by law no. 70 of 25 January 1994, the quantities and qualitative characteristics of the waste subject to the aforesaid activities. Agricultural entrepreneurs of art. 2135 of the civil code with an annual turnover not exceeding eight thousand euros are exempt from this obligation.
In the case where the producers of hazardous waste confer the same to the public collection service competent for the territory and by special agreement, the communication is made by the service manager limited to the quantity conferred.
The institutional subjects responsible for the integrated urban and assimilated waste management service shall communicate annually, according to the methods provided for by law no. 70 of 25 January 1994, the following information relating to the previous year:
a) the quantity of urban waste collected in their territory;
b) the quantity of special waste collected in their territory following a specific convention with public or private subjects;
c) the subjects who have provided for the management of the waste, specifying the operations carried out, the types and the quantity of waste managed by each;
d) the management and technical and financial amortization costs of the investments for the waste management activities, as well as the proceeds from the tariff of article 238 and the proceeds from the consortia aimed at the recovery of waste;
e) the data relating to separate collection;
f) the quantities collected, divided by materials, in implementation of the agreements with the consortia aimed at the recovery of waste.
The Regional and Provincial Sections and of the autonomous provinces of the Cadastre, on the basis of the data transmitted by the Chambers of Commerce, Industry, Handicraft, and Agriculture, shall provide for the processing of the data and its subsequent transmission to the National Section within thirty days of receipt, pursuant to article 2, paragraph 2, of law no. 70 of 25 January 1994, of the information of paragraphs 3 and 4. The Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) processes the data, highlighting the types and quantities of waste produced, collected, transported, recovered, and disposed of, as well as the disposal and recovery plants in operation and ensures its publicity.
For the communications relating to packaging waste, the provisions of article 220, paragraph 2, apply.
Art. 190
Loading and unloading registers
The subjects referred to in article 189, paragraph 3, have the obligation to keep a loading and unloading register on which they must record the information on the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of the waste, to be used for the purposes of the annual communication to the Cadastre. The subjects who produce non-hazardous waste of article 184, paragraph 3, letters c), d), and g), have the obligation to keep a loading and unloading register on which they must record the information on the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of the waste. The annotations must be made:
a) for producers, at least within ten working days from the production of the waste and from its unloading;
b) for the subjects who carry out the collection and transport, at least within ten working days from the carrying out of the transport;
c) for traders, intermediaries, and consortia, at least within ten working days from the carrying out of the relative transaction;
d) for the subjects who carry out the recovery and disposal operations, within two working days of taking charge of the waste.
The register kept by the establishments and companies that carry out waste disposal and recovery activities must, moreover, contain:
a) the origin, quantity, characteristics, and specific destination of the waste;
b) the date of loading and unloading of the waste and the means of transport used;
c) the treatment method employed.
The registers are kept at each plant of production, storage, recovery, and disposal of waste, as well as at the headquarters of the companies that carry out collection and transport activities, as well as at the headquarters of the traders and intermediaries. The registers integrated with the forms of article 193 relating to the transport of waste are kept for five years from the date of the last registration, with the exception of the registers relating to the waste disposal operations in landfills, which must be kept indefinitely and at the end of the activity must be delivered to the authority that issued the authorization.
The subjects whose annual production of waste does not exceed ten tons of non-hazardous waste and two tons of hazardous waste may fulfill the obligation of keeping the loading and unloading registers of waste also through the interested category organizations or their service companies that provide to record the data provided with monthly frequency, keeping at the company headquarters a copy of the transmitted data.
The information contained in the register shall be made available at any time to the control authority that requests it.
The registers are numbered, stamped, and managed with the procedures and methods established by the legislation on VAT registers. The obligations connected with the keeping of the loading and unloading registers are considered correctly fulfilled also if A4 format paper, regularly numbered, is used.
The national discipline relating to this article is defined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea within sixty days from the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 148 of 1 April 1998, as amended by paragraph 9, and of the circular of the Minister of the Environment of 4 August 1998, continue to apply.
The organizations of articles 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), 223, 224, 228, 233, 234, 235 and 236, are exempt from the obligation of paragraph 1, provided that they have documentary or accounting evidence with similar functions and without prejudice to the documentary and accounting fulfillments provided for the aforesaid subjects by the current norms.
In Annex 6.C1, section III, letter c), of the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 148 of 1 April 1998, after the words: "in liters" the conjunction: "and" is replaced by the disjunction: "or".

Art. 191
Contingent and urgent ordinances and substitute powers
Without prejudice to the provisions in force regarding environmental, health, and public safety protection, with particular reference to the provisions on the power of ordinance of art. 5 of Law no. 225 of 24 February 1992, establishing the national civil protection service, if situations of exceptional and urgent need for the protection of public health and the environment occur, and it is not otherwise possible to provide, the President of the Regional Council or the President of the province or the Mayor may issue, within their respective competencies, contingent and urgent ordinances to allow temporary recourse to special forms of waste management, including in derogation of the provisions in force, ensuring a high level of health and environmental protection. These ordinances are communicated to the President of the Council of Ministers, to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, to the Minister of Health, to the Minister of Productive Activities, to the President of the region, and to the area authority of article 201 within three days of their issuance and are effective for a period not exceeding six months.
Within one hundred and twenty days of the adoption of the ordinances of paragraph 1, the President of the Regional Council promotes and adopts the necessary initiatives to guarantee separate collection, reuse, recycling, and disposal of waste. In case of futile passage of the term and of ascertained inactivity, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall warn the President of the Regional Council to provide within a suitable term and, in case of prolonged inertia, may adopt in a substitute capacity all the necessary initiatives for the aforesaid purposes.
The ordinances of paragraph 1 indicate the norms to which it is intended to derogate and are adopted on the opinion of the local technical or technical-sanitary bodies, which express themselves with specific reference to the environmental consequences.
The ordinances of paragraph 1 cannot be reiterated for more than two times. If proven needs arise, the President of the region in agreement with the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea may adopt, dictating specific prescriptions, the ordinances of paragraph 1 also beyond the aforesaid terms.
The ordinances of paragraph 1 that allow temporary recourse to special forms of hazardous waste management are communicated by the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea to the Commission of the European Union.
Art. 192
Prohibition of abandonment
The abandonment and uncontrolled deposit of waste on the ground and in the ground are prohibited.
It is also forbidden to release waste of any kind, in solid or liquid state, into surface and groundwater.
Without prejudice to the application of the sanctions of articles 255 and 256, anyone who violates the prohibitions of paragraphs 1 and 2 is required to proceed with the removal, the start to recovery or disposal of the waste and the restoration of the state of the places jointly and severally with the owner and with the holders of real or personal rights of enjoyment on the area, to whom this violation is attributable by intent or fault, on the basis of the checks carried out, in an adversarial process with the interested subjects, by the subjects responsible for the control. The Mayor orders with an ordinance the necessary operations for this purpose and the term within which to provide, after which he proceeds with the execution at the expense of the obligated subjects and the recovery of the advanced sums.
If the responsibility for the illicit act is attributable to administrators or representatives of a legal person pursuant to and for the effects of paragraph 3, the legal person and the subjects who have succeeded to the rights of the person himself are jointly and severally liable, according to the provisions of legislative decree no. 231 of 8 June 2001, on the administrative responsibility of legal persons, companies, and associations.
Art. 193
Transport of waste
During transport carried out by entities or companies, waste is accompanied by an identification form from which at least the following data must result:
a) name and address of the producer and holder;
b) origin, type, and quantity of the waste;
c) destination plant;
d) date and route of the shipment;
e) name and address of the recipient.
The identification form of paragraph 1 must be drawn up in four copies, compiled, dated, and signed by the producer or holder of the waste and countersigned by the transporter. A copy of the form must remain with the producer or holder and the other three, countersigned and dated upon arrival by the recipient, are acquired one by the recipient and two by the transporter, who provides to transmit one to the holder. The copies of the form must be kept for five years.
During collection and transport, hazardous waste must be packaged and labeled in accordance with the current norms on the matter.
The provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply to the transport of urban waste carried out by the subject who manages the public service nor to the transport of non-hazardous waste carried out by the producer of the waste itself, occasionally and sporadically, not exceeding the quantity of thirty kilograms or thirty liters.
The national discipline relating to this article is defined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea to be issued within sixty days of the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 145 of 1 April 1998 continue to apply.
The definition of the model and contents of the identification form and the methods of numbering, stamping, and management of the identification forms, as well as the discipline of the specific responsibilities of the producer or holder, of the transporter, and of the recipient are established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, taking into account the specific modalities of the individual types of transport, with particular reference to intermodal transport, rail transport, and micro-collection. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the following provisions continue to apply:
a) regarding the definition of the model and contents of the identification form, the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 145 of 1 April 1998 applies;
b) regarding numbering and stamping, the identification forms must be numbered and stamped by the offices of the Revenue Agency or by the Chambers of Commerce, Industry, Handicraft, and Agriculture or by the competent regional and provincial offices for waste and must be noted on the VAT purchase register. The stamping of the aforesaid identification forms is free and is not subject to any right or tax.
The form of this article is validly replaced, for waste subject to cross-border shipments, by the documents provided for by the community legislation of article 194, including with regard to the route taken on national territory.
The provisions of this article do not apply to the cases regulated by legislative decree no. 99 of 27 January 1992, relating to sludge in agriculture, compatible with the discipline of regulation (EEC) no. 259/1993 of 1 February 1993.
The movement of waste exclusively within private areas is not considered transport for the purposes of the fourth part of this decree.
The commercial document, of art. 7 of regulation (EC) no. 1774/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council, for operators subject to the obligation of keeping the loading and unloading registers of article 190, replaces for all purposes the identification form of paragraph 1.
The micro-collection of waste, understood as the collection of waste by a single collector or transporter from multiple producers or holders carried out with the same vehicle, must be carried out in the shortest technically possible time. In the identification forms of the waste, all the intermediate stops planned must be indicated in the space relating to the route. In the case where the route should undergo variations, the route actually taken must be indicated in the space relating to the annotations by the transporter.
The stop during the transport of the loaded waste for shipment inside the ports and railway yards, of the departure, sorting, and arrival stations, the stationing of the vehicles in transport configuration, as well as the technical stops for transshipment operations, do not fall within the storage activities of article 183, paragraph 1, letter l), provided that they are dictated by transport needs and do not exceed forty-eight hours, excluding from the calculation the days closed to traffic.
The identification form of waste of paragraph 1 replaces for all purposes the model F of the ministerial decree no. 392 of 16 May 1996.
Art. 194
Transboundary shipments
Transboundary shipments of waste are regulated by the community regulations that regulate the matter, by the bilateral agreements of art. 19 of regulation (EEC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993, and by the decree of paragraph 3.
The agreements in force between the State of the Vatican City, the Republic of San Marino, and the Italian Republic are saved, pursuant to article 19 of the aforesaid regulation (EEC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993. The provisions of art. 20 of the aforesaid regulation do not apply to the imports of solid urban and assimilated waste from the State of the Vatican City and the Republic of San Marino.
By decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Productive Activities, of Health, of Economy and Finance, of Infrastructure and Transport, in compliance with the norms of regulation (EEC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993, the following are regulated:
a) the criteria for calculating the minimum amounts of the financial guarantees to be provided for the shipments of waste, of art. 27 of the aforesaid regulation; these guarantees are reduced by fifty percent for companies registered pursuant to regulation (EC) no. 761/2001, of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 19 March 2001 (Emas), and by forty percent in the case of companies in possession of the environmental certification pursuant to the Uni En Iso 14001 standard;
b) the administrative expenses charged to the notifiers pursuant to art. 33, paragraph 1, of the regulation;
c) the specific modalities for the transport of waste in the States of paragraph 2;
d) the modalities for verifying the application of the principle of proximity for waste destined for disposal.
Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the interministerial decree no. 370 of 3 September 1998 continue to apply.
Pursuant to and for the effects of regulation (EEC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993:
a) the competent authorities of dispatch and destination are the regions and autonomous provinces;
b) the transit authority is the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea;
c) the correspondent is the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea.
The regions and autonomous provinces communicate the information of art. 38 of regulation (EEC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993 to the Ministry of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea for its subsequent forwarding to the Commission of the European Union, as well as, by 30 September of each year, the data, referring to the previous year, provided for by article 13, paragraph 3, of the Basel Convention, ratified by law no. 340 of 18 August 1993.
To the ferrous and non-ferrous scrap of article 183, paragraph 1, letter u), the provisions of article 212, paragraph 12, apply.
CHAPTER II - COMPETENCIES
Art. 195
Competencies of the state
Without prejudice to the further state competencies provided for by special provisions, including those contained in the fourth part of this decree, the following pertain to the State:
a) the functions of guidance and coordination necessary for the implementation of the fourth part of this decree, to be exercised pursuant to art. 8 of law no. 59 of 15 March 1997, within the limits of what is established by article 8, paragraph 6, of law no. 131 of 5 June 2003;
b) the definition of the general criteria and methodologies for the integrated management of waste, as well as the identification of the needs for the disposal of sanitary waste, also for the purpose of reducing its movement;
c) the identification of the initiatives and measures to prevent and limit, including through recourse to forms of security deposit on goods placed on the market, the production of waste, as well as to reduce its hazardousness;
d) the identification of the homogeneous flows of waste production with a higher environmental impact, which present the greatest difficulties of disposal or particular possibilities of recovery both for the substances used in the base products and for the overall quantity of the waste itself;
e) the adoption of general criteria for the drafting of sector plans for the reduction, recycling, recovery, and optimization of waste flows;
f) the identification, in respect of the constitutional attributions of the regions, of the recovery and disposal plants of pre-eminent national interest to be realized for the modernization and development of the country; the identification is carried out, after consulting the Unified Conference of article 8 of legislative decree no. 281 of 28 August 1997, by means of a program, adopted by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, and inserted in the Economic and Financial Programming Document, with an indication of the necessary allocations for their realization. In identifying the strategic infrastructures and settlements of this paragraph, the Government proceeds according to the purposes of socio-economic rebalancing between the areas of the national territory. The Government indicates in the draft financial law pursuant to article 11, paragraph 3, letter i-ter), of law no. 468 of 5 August 1978, the necessary resources, also for the purpose of disbursing the compensatory contributions in favor of the local authorities, which integrate the public, community, and private financing available for this purpose;
g) the definition, in respect of the constitutional attributions of the regions, of a national plan of communication and environmental knowledge. The definition is carried out, after consulting the Unified Conference of article 8 of legislative decree no. 281 of 28 August 1997, by means of a Program, formulated by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, inserted in the Economic and Financial Programming Document, with an indication of the necessary allocations for the realization;
h) the indication of the types of measures aimed at encouraging the rationalization of the collection, sorting, and recycling of waste;
i) the identification of initiatives and actions, including economic ones, to favor the recycling and recovery of secondary raw material from waste, as well as to promote the market for materials recovered from waste and their use by public administrations and economic subjects, including pursuant to art. 52, paragraph 56, letter a), of law no. 448 of 28 December 2001, and of the decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea no. 203 of 8 May 2003;
l) the identification of quality objectives of waste management services;
m) the determination of general criteria, differentiated for urban waste and for special waste, for the purpose of the elaboration of the regional plans of article 199 with particular reference to the determination, in agreement with the State-regions Conference, of the guidelines for the identification of the Optimal territorial areas, to be constituted pursuant to article 200, and for the coordination of the plans themselves;
n) the determination, regarding the assignment of the concession of the service for the integrated management of waste, in agreement with the State-regions Conference, of the guidelines for the definition of the tenders, and in particular of the admission requirements of the companies, and of the relative specifications, including with reference to the economic elements relating to the existing plants;
o) the determination, in agreement with the State-regions Conference, of the guidelines concerning the forms and modes of cooperation between the local authorities, including with reference to the collection of the tariff on urban waste falling within the same optimal territorial area, according to criteria of transparency, efficiency, effectiveness, and economy;
p) the indication of the general criteria relating to the characteristics of the areas not suitable for the location of waste disposal plants;
q) the indication of the general criteria for the organization and implementation of the separate collection of urban waste;
r) the determination, in agreement with the State-regions Conference, of the guidelines, the general criteria, and the standards for the remediation of contaminated sites, as well as the determination of the criteria to identify the remediation interventions which, in relation to the significance of the environmental impact connected with the extension of the interested area, to the quantity and hazardousness of the pollutants present, are of national interest;
s) the determination of the calculation methodologies and the definition of recycled material for the implementation of article 196, paragraph 1, letter p);
t) the adaptation of the fourth part of this decree to the directives, decisions, and regulations of the European Union.
The following are also of state competence:
a) the indication of the criteria and modalities of adoption, according to principles of unity, completeness, and coordination, of the technical norms for the management of waste, of hazardous waste, and of specific types of waste, with reference also to the relative accreditation and certification systems pursuant to article 178, paragraph 5;
b) the adoption of the norms and conditions for the application of the simplified procedures of articles 214, 215, and 216, including the guidelines containing the specification of the report to be attached to the communication provided for by those articles;
c) the determination of the limits of acceptability and of the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of certain substances contained in the waste in relation to specific uses of the same;
d) the determination and the discipline of the recovery activities of asbestos products and of the goods and products containing asbestos, by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Health and with the Minister of Productive Activities;
e) the determination of the qualitative and quantitative criteria for the assimilation, for the purposes of collection and disposal, of special waste to urban waste, deriving from entities and companies operating on areas with a surface area not exceeding 150 square meters in municipalities with a resident population of less than 10,000 inhabitants, or a surface area not exceeding 250 square meters in municipalities with a resident population of more than 10,000 inhabitants. The waste that is formed in the production areas, including the warehouses of raw materials and finished products, cannot normally be assimilated to urban waste, except for the waste produced in the offices, in the canteens, in the company stores, in the bars, and in the premises at the service of the workers or in any case open to the public;
f) the adoption of a uniform model of the certificate of occurred disposal issued by the plant owner which will have to indicate for each load and/or conferment the disposed quota in relation to the authorized annual capacity of the same plant;
g) the definition of the methods, procedures, and standards for the sampling and analysis of waste;
h) the determination of the technical and financial requirements and capacities for the exercise of waste management activities, including the general criteria for the determination of the financial guarantees in favor of the regions, with particular reference to those of the subjects subject to registration with the Register of article 212, according to the modality of paragraph 9 of the same article;
i) the reorganization and keeping of the National Waste Cadastre;
l) the definition of the model and contents of the form of article 193 and the regulation of waste transport, including the identification of the types of waste that for proven technical, environmental, and economic reasons must be transported by rail;
m) the identification of the types of waste that for proven technical, environmental, and economic reasons can be disposed of directly in landfills;
n) the adoption of a uniform model of the register of article 190 and the definition of the modalities for keeping it, as well as the identification of any documents substituting for the register itself;
o) the identification of electrical and electronic waste, of article 227, paragraph 1, letter a);
p) the updating of the Annexes to the fourth part of this decree;
q) the adoption of the technical norms, the modalities, and the conditions of use of the product obtained through composting, with particular reference to the agronomic use as fertilizer, pursuant to law no. 748 of 19 October 1984, and of the quality product obtained through composting from organic waste selected at the source with separate collection;
r) the authorization for the disposal of waste in marine waters, in accordance with the provisions established by the community norms and the international conventions in force on the matter, issued by the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea on the proposal of the maritime authority in whose area of competence the port closest to the place where the disposal is to be carried out is located or the port from which the ship with the load of waste to be disposed of departs;
s) the identification of the measure of the absorbent and neutralizing substances, previously tested by Universities or specialized Institutes, with which the plants intended for the storage, recharging, maintenance, deposit, and replacement of accumulators must be equipped in order to prevent the pollution of the soil, of the subsoil and to avoid damage to health and the environment deriving from the leakage of acid, taking into account the size of the plants, the number of accumulators and the risk of spillage connected with the type of activity carried out.
3. Unless otherwise provided by the fourth part of this decree, the functions of paragraph 1 are exercised pursuant to law no. 400 of 23 August 1988, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Productive Activities, of Health, and of the Interior, having heard the State-regions Conference, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano.
4. Unless otherwise provided by the fourth part of this decree, the regulatory and technical norms of paragraph 2 are adopted, pursuant to art. 17, paragraph 3, of law no. 400 of 23 August 1988, with decrees of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Productive Activities, of Health, and of the Interior, as well as, when the aforesaid norms concern agricultural waste and the transport of waste, in concert, respectively, with the Ministers of Agricultural and Forestry Policies and of Infrastructure and Transport.
5. Without prejudice to what is provided by legislative decree no. 112 of 31 March 1998, for the purposes of surveillance and ascertainment of the illicit acts in violation of the legislation on waste as well as the repression of illicit trafficking and illegal disposal of waste, the Carabinieri Command for the protection of the environment (C.C.T.A.) and the Corps of the Port Captaincies shall act; the State Forestry Corps may also intervene, and the Guardia di Finanza and the State Police may contribute.

**Art. 196**
**Competencies of the regions**
1. The following are of the competence of the regions, in respect of the principles provided for by the current legislation and by the fourth part of this decree, including those of article 195:
a) the preparation, adoption, and updating, having heard the provinces, the municipalities, and the Area Authorities, of the regional waste management plans, of article 199;
b) the regulation of waste management activities, including the separate collection of urban waste, including hazardous waste, according to a general criterion of separation of waste of food origin and of scraps of plant and animal products or in any case with a high moisture content from the remaining waste;
c) the elaboration, approval, and updating of the plans for the remediation of contaminated areas of their competence;
d) the approval of the projects of new plants for the management of waste, including hazardous waste, and the authorization for the modifications of existing plants, without prejudice to the state competencies of article 195, paragraph 1, letter f);
e) the authorization for the exercise of the disposal and recovery operations of waste, including hazardous waste;
f) the activities in the matter of transboundary shipments of waste that regulation (EEC) no. 259/93 of 1 February 1993 attributes to the competent authorities of dispatch and destination;
g) the delimitation, in respect of the general guidelines of article 195, paragraph 1, letter m), of the optimal territorial areas for the management of urban and assimilated waste;
h) the drafting of guidelines and criteria for the preparation and approval of the remediation and safety projects, as well as the identification of the types of projects not subject to authorization, in respect of what is provided for in article 195, paragraph 1, letter r);
i) the promotion of the integrated management of waste;
l) the incentive for the reduction of waste production and for its recovery;
m) the specification of the contents of the report to be attached to the communication of articles 214, 215, and 216, in respect of guidelines elaborated pursuant to article 195, paragraph 2, letter b);
n) the definition of criteria for the identification, by the provinces, of the areas not suitable for the location of waste disposal and recovery plants, in respect of the general criteria indicated in article 195, paragraph 1, letter p);
o) the definition of the criteria for the identification of the places or plants suitable for disposal and the determination, in respect of the technical norms of article 195, paragraph 2, letter a), of special provisions for waste of a particular type;
p) the adoption, on the basis of a calculation methodology and criteria established by a specific decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Ministers of Productive Activities and of Health, having heard the Minister for Regional Affairs, to be issued within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, of the provisions necessary so that the public entities and the companies with a prevalent public capital, including those managing services, cover their annual need for manufactured goods and goods, indicated in the same decree, with a quota of products obtained from recycled material not less than 30 percent of the same need. To this end, the aforesaid subjects shall insert in the tender notices or in the selection notices for the award of specific preference clauses, on equal terms with the other requirements and conditions. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea no. 203 of 8 May 2003, and subsequent implementation circulars, continue to apply. In the meantime, the existing regional provisions remain in force.
2. For the exercise of the functions of paragraph 1, the regions shall also avail themselves of the regional agencies for environmental protection.
3. The regions shall favor the realization of waste disposal and recovery plants in industrial areas, compatible with the characteristics of the areas themselves, encouraging self-disposal initiatives. This provision does not apply to landfills.

**Art. 197**
**Competencies of the provinces**
1. In implementation of art. 19 of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000, the provinces are competent for:
a) the control and verification of the remediation interventions and the monitoring consequent to them;
b) the periodic control over all waste management, intermediation, and trade activities, including the ascertainment of the violations of the provisions of the fourth part of this decree;
c) the verification and control of the requirements provided for the application of the simplified procedures, with the modalities of articles 214, 215, and 216;
d) the identification, on the basis of the provisions of the territorial coordination plan of article 20, paragraph 2, of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000, if already adopted, and of the provisions of article 199, paragraph 3, letters d) and h), as well as having heard the Area Authority and the municipalities, of the zones suitable for the location of waste disposal plants, as well as of the zones not suitable for the location of waste recovery and disposal plants.
2. For the exercise of their functions, the provinces may avail themselves, by means of specific conventions, of public bodies, including the Regional Agencies for Environmental Protection (ARPA), with specific experience and technical skills on the matter, without prejudice to what is provided for in articles 214, 215, and 216 in the matter of simplified procedures.
3. The control officers are authorized to carry out inspections, verifications, and sample collections within establishments, plants, or companies that produce or that carry out waste management activities. The industrial secret cannot be opposed to the control officers, who are, in turn, held to the obligation of confidentiality pursuant to the current legislation.
4. The personnel belonging to the Carabinieri Command for the protection of the environment (C.C.T.A.) is authorized to carry out the necessary inspections and verifications for the purpose of the performance of the functions of art. 8 of law no. 349 of 8 July 1986, establishing the Ministry of the Environment.
5. Within the competencies of paragraph 1, the provinces shall subject to adequate periodic controls the establishments and companies that dispose of or recover waste, ensuring, in particular, that adequate periodic controls are carried out on the activities subject to the simplified procedures of articles 214, 215, and 216 and that the controls concerning the collection and transport of hazardous waste concern, in the first place, the origin and destination of the waste.
6. The other provisions in force on surveillance and control provided for by special provisions remain unaffected.

**Art. 198**
**Competencies of the municipalities**
1. The municipalities contribute, within the activities carried out at the level of the optimal territorial areas of article 200 and with the modalities provided therein, to the management of urban and assimilated waste. Until the start of the activities of the subject awarded the public tender called by the Area Authority pursuant to article 202, the municipalities shall continue the management of urban waste and of assimilated waste sent for disposal under a monopoly regime in the forms of article 113, paragraph 5, of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000.
2. The municipalities contribute to regulating the management of urban waste with specific regulations which, in respect of the principles of transparency, efficiency, effectiveness, and economy and in coherence with the area plans adopted pursuant to article 201, paragraph 3, establish in particular:
a) the measures to ensure hygienic-sanitary protection in all phases of the management of urban waste;
b) the modalities of the collection and transport service of urban waste;
c) the modalities of the conferment, of the separate collection and of the transport of urban and assimilated waste in order to guarantee a distinct management of the different fractions of waste and to promote their recovery;
d) the norms aimed at guaranteeing a distinct and adequate management of hazardous urban waste and of waste from exhumation and disinterment of article 184, paragraph 2, letter f);
e) the necessary measures to optimize the forms of conferment, collection, and transport of primary packaging waste in synergy with other commodity fractions, setting minimum standards to be respected;
f) the modalities of execution of the weighing of urban waste before sending it for recovery and disposal;
g) the assimilation, for quality and quantity, of special non-hazardous waste to urban waste, according to the criteria of article 195, paragraph 2, letter e), without prejudice to the definitions of article 184, paragraph 2, letters c) and d).
3. The municipalities are required to provide the region, the province, and the Area Authorities with all the information on the management of urban waste requested by them.
4. The municipalities are also required to express their opinion regarding the approval of the remediation projects of contaminated sites issued by the regions.

**CHAPTER III - INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICE**

**Art. 199**
**Regional plans**
1. The regions, having heard the provinces, the municipalities, and, with regard to urban waste, the Area Authorities of article 201, in respect of the principles and purposes of articles 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, and 182 and in conformity with the general criteria established by article 195, paragraph 1, letter m) and with those provided for in this article, shall prepare regional waste management plans ensuring adequate publicity and the maximum participation of citizens, pursuant to law no. 241 of 7 August 1990.
2. The regional waste management plans provide for measures aimed at reducing the quantities, volumes, and hazardousness of waste.
3. The regional waste management plans also provide for:
a) the conditions and technical criteria on the basis of which, in respect of the provisions in force on the matter, the plants for the management of waste, with the exception of landfills, can be located in the areas intended for productive settlements;
b) the typology and the complex of the disposal and recovery plants for urban waste to be realized in the region, taking into account the objective of ensuring the management of non-hazardous urban waste within the optimal territorial areas of article 200, as well as the offer of disposal and recovery from the industrial system;
c) the delimitation of each single optimal territorial area on the regional territory, in respect of the guidelines of article 195, paragraph 1, letter m);
d) the complex of the activities and the needs of the necessary plants to guarantee the management of urban waste according to criteria of transparency, efficiency, effectiveness, economy, and self-sufficiency of the management of non-hazardous urban waste within each of the optimal territorial areas of article 200, as well as to ensure the disposal of special waste in places close to those of production in order to favor the reduction of the movement of waste;
e) the promotion of the management of waste for optimal territorial areas through an adequate discipline of incentives, providing for the most deserving areas, taking into account the available resources under current legislation, a maggioration of contributions; to this end, the regions may establish a special fund in their budgets;
f) the prescriptions against soil pollution and the deposit on the ground of landfills of civil and industrial waste that may in any case affect the quality of surface and groundwater bodies, in respect of the prescriptions dictated pursuant to article 65, paragraph 3, letter f);
g) the estimate of the costs of the urban waste recovery and disposal operations;
h) the criteria for the identification, by the provinces, of the areas not suitable for the location of waste recovery and disposal plants as well as for the identification of the places or plants suitable for the disposal of waste, in respect of the general criteria of article 195, paragraph 1, letter p);
i) the initiatives aimed at limiting the production of waste and at favoring the reuse, recycling, and recovery of waste;
l) the initiatives aimed at favoring the recovery from waste of materials and energy;
m) the measures aimed at promoting the regionalization of the collection, sorting, and disposal of urban waste;
n) the types, quantities, and origin of the waste to be recovered or disposed of, divided by single optimal territorial area with regard to urban waste;
o) the determination, in respect of the technical norms of article 195, paragraph 2, letter a), of special provisions for waste of a particular type, including those of article 225, paragraph 6;
p) the general technical requirements relating to waste management activities in respect of the national and community legislation.
4. The regional waste management plan is coordinated with the other planning instruments of regional competence provided for by the current legislation, where adopted.
5. The plans for the remediation of contaminated areas, which must provide for, are an integral part of the regional plan:
a) the order of priority of the interventions, based on a risk assessment criterion elaborated by the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT);
b) the identification of the sites to be remediated and the general characteristics of the pollutants present;
c) the modalities of the remediation and environmental restoration interventions, which give priority to the use of materials from urban waste recovery activities;
d) the estimate of the financial burdens;
e) the modalities of disposal of the materials to be removed.
6. The approval of the regional plan or its adaptation is a necessary requirement to access national funding.
7. The region approves or adapts the plan within two years from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree; in the meantime, the current regional plans remain in force.
8. In case of futile passage of the term of paragraph 7 and of ascertained inactivity, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall warn the competent regional bodies to comply within a suitable term and, in case of prolonged inertia, shall adopt, in a substitute capacity, the necessary provisions for the elaboration and approval of the regional plan.
9. If the competent authorities do not realize the interventions provided for by the regional plan in the terms and with the modalities established and such omissions may cause serious prejudice to the implementation of the plan itself, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea shall warn the defaulting authorities to provide within a term of not less than one hundred and eighty days. After said term has passed without effect, the Minister may adopt, in a substitute capacity, all the necessary and suitable provisions for the implementation of the interventions contained in the plan. To this end, he may also avail himself of "ad acta" commissioners.
10. The provisions of paragraph 9 may concern interventions aimed at:
a) implementing the separate collection of waste;
b) providing for the re-employment, recovery, and recycling of packaging conferred to the public service;
c) favoring urban waste treatment operations for the purpose of recycling and recovering the same;
d) favoring the realization and use of plants for the recovery of solid urban waste.
11. The regions, having heard the interested provinces, in agreement with each other or individually, for the purposes of the fourth part of this decree shall provide for the updating of the plan as well as for the programming of the necessary implementing interventions in accordance with the procedures and within the limits of the resources provided for by the current legislation.
12. On the basis of specific program agreements stipulated with the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, in agreement with the interested region, the construction and operation, or only the operation, within existing industrial settlements, of plants for the recovery of urban waste not provided for by the regional plan may be authorized, pursuant to articles 214 and 216, if the following conditions are met:
a) waste from separate collection is recycled and recovered as a primary raw material, or compost is produced from waste or fuel is used from waste;
b) the technical norms of articles 214 and 216 are respected;
c) the best technologies for environmental protection are used;
d) a reduction of polluting emissions is guaranteed.

**Art. 200**
**Territorial organization of the integrated urban waste management service**
1. The management of urban waste is organized on the basis of optimal territorial areas, hereinafter also referred to as ATO, delimited by the regional plan of article 199, in respect of the guidelines of article 195, paragraph 1, letters m), n), and o), and according to the following criteria:
a) overcoming the fragmentation of managements through an integrated waste management service;
b) achieving adequate management dimensions, defined on the basis of physical, demographic, technical parameters and on the basis of political-administrative divisions;
c) adequate evaluation of the road and railway communication system in order to optimize transport within the ATO;
d) valorization of common needs and affinities in the production and management of waste;
e) recognition of already realized and functioning waste management plants;
f) consideration of the previous delimitations so that the new ATOs deviate from the previous ones only on the basis of motivated needs of efficiency, effectiveness, and economy.
2. The regions, having heard the interested provinces and municipalities, within the framework of the programming and planning activities of their competence, within the term of six months from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, shall provide for the delimitation of the optimal territorial areas, in respect of the guidelines of article 195, paragraph 1, letter m). The provision is communicated to the interested provinces and municipalities.
3. The interested regions, in agreement with each other, shall delimit the ATOs if they are included in the territory of two or more regions.
4. The regions shall regulate the control, including in a substitute capacity, of the waste management operations, of the functionality of the relative plants, and of the respect of the limits and prescriptions provided for by the relative authorizations.
5. The cities or agglomerations of municipalities, of dimensions greater than the average ones of a single area, can be subdivided taking into account the criteria of paragraph 1.
6. The single municipalities within thirty days from the communication of paragraph 2 can submit motivated and documented requests for modification to the assignment to a specific territorial area and for a shift to a different territorial area, bordering on that of assignment.
7. The regions may adopt alternative models or in derogation of the model of the Optimal Territorial Areas where they prepare a regional waste plan that demonstrates its adequacy with respect to the strategic objectives provided for by the current legislation, with particular reference to the general criteria and the guidelines reserved, on the matter, to the State pursuant to article 195.

**Art. 201**
**Discipline of the integrated urban waste management service**
1. For the purpose of organizing the integrated urban waste management service, the regions and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, within the term of six months from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, shall regulate the forms and modes of cooperation between the local authorities falling within the same optimal area, providing that they themselves constitute the Area Authorities of paragraph 2, to which the organization, the entrustment, and the control of the integrated waste management service are delegated, in respect of the principle of coordination with the competencies of the other public administrations.
2. The Area Authority is a structure with legal personality constituted in each optimal territorial area delimited by the competent region, to which the local authorities mandatorily participate and to which the exercise of their competencies in the matter of integrated waste management is transferred.
3. The Area Authority organizes the service and determines the objectives to be pursued to guarantee its management according to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, economy, and transparency; to this end, it adopts a specific area plan in accordance with what is provided for in article 203, paragraph 3.
4. For the management and provision of the integrated management service and for the pursuit of the objectives determined by the Area Authority, the following activities are entrusted, pursuant to article 202 and in respect of the community and national legislation on public evidence:
a) the realization, management, and provision of the entire service, including the management and realization of the plants;
b) the collection, separate collection, commercialization, and complete disposal of all urban and assimilated waste produced within the ATO.
5. In each area:
a) self-sufficiency of disposal is reached, within five years of its constitution, also, where appropriate, through forms of cooperation and connection with other public and private subjects;
b) the presence of at least one complex technology treatment plant, including a service landfill, is guaranteed.
6. The duration of the management by the entrusted subjects, not less than fifteen years, is regulated by the regions in such a way as to allow the achievement of objectives of efficiency, effectiveness, and economy.

**Art. 202**
**Entrustment of the service**
1. The Area Authority shall award the integrated urban waste management service by means of a tender regulated by the principles and community provisions, in accordance with the criteria of article 113, paragraph 7, of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000, as well as with reference to the amount of the consideration for the management carried out, taking into account the technical guarantees and the previous specific experiences of the competitors, according to modalities and terms defined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in respect of the regional competencies on the matter.
2. The participants in the tender must formulate, with a specific technical-illustrative report attached to the offer, proposals for the improvement of the management, for the reduction of the quantities of waste to be disposed of, and for the improvement of the environmental factors, proposing their own plan for the reduction of the considerations for the management upon the achievement of autonomously defined objectives.
3. In the evaluation of the proposals, account will be taken, in particular, of the weight that will fall on the user both in economic terms and in terms of the complexity of the operations at his charge.
4. The plants and the other patrimonial endowments owned by the local authorities already existing at the time of the assignment of the service are conferred on loan to the subjects entrusted with the same service.
5. The new plants are realized by the subject entrusted with the service or directly, pursuant to article 113, paragraph 5-ter, of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000, if it is in possession of the requirements prescribed by the current legislation, or by recourse to the procedures of law no. 109 of 11 February 1994, or according to the project financing scheme of articles 37 bis and following of the aforesaid law no. 109 of 1994.
6. The personnel who, as of 31 December 2005 or in any case eight months before the entrustment of the service, belong to the municipal administrations, to the former municipal or consortium companies and to the private companies, including cooperatives, that operate in the sector of municipal services for waste management shall be subject, without prejudice to the termination of the employment relationship, to the direct and immediate transfer to the new manager of the integrated waste service, with the safeguarding of the contractual, collective and individual conditions in place. In the case of transfer of employees of public entities and of former municipal or consortium companies and of private companies, including cooperatives, to the manager of the integrated urban waste service, the discipline of the transfer of a business branch of art. 2112 of the civil code applies, pursuant to article 31 of legislative decree no. 165 of 30 March 2001.

**Art. 203**
**Standard service contract type**
1. The relations between the Area Authorities and the subjects entrusted with the integrated service are regulated by service contracts, to be attached to the tender specifications, conforming to a standard type adopted by the regions in accordance with the criteria and guidelines of article 195, paragraph 1, letters m), n), and o).
2. The standard type provides for:
a) the legal regime chosen for the management of the service;
b) the obligation to achieve the economic-financial equilibrium of the management;
c) the duration of the entrustment, in any case not less than fifteen years;
d) the criteria for defining the economic-financial plan for the integrated management of the service;
e) the modalities of control of the correct exercise of the service;
f) the principles and general rules relating to the activities and types of control, in relation to the service levels and the consideration, the modalities, the terms and the procedures for the carrying out of the control and the characteristics of the organizational structures for this purpose;
g) the obligations of communication and transmission of data, information and documents of the manager and the relative sanctions;
h) the penalties, the sanctions in case of non-fulfillment and the conditions of resolution according to the principles of the civil code, diversified according to the type of control;
i) the level of efficiency and reliability of the service to be assured to the users, including with reference to the maintenance of the plants;
l) the faculty of redemption according to the principles of title I, chapter II, of the regulation approved by decree of the President of the Republic no. 902 of 4 October 1986;
m) the obligation of return of the works, plants and other patrimonial endowments instrumental to the provision of the service in conditions of efficiency and in a good state of conservation;
n) suitable financial and insurance guarantees;
o) the criteria and modalities of application of the tariffs determined by the local entities and their updating, including with reference to the different categories of users.
3. For the purpose of defining the contents of the standard type of paragraph 2, the Area Authorities carry out the survey of the existing works and plants, transmitting the relative data to the region. The Area Authorities also, for the same purposes, define the procedures and modalities, including on a multi-year basis, for the achievement of the objectives provided for by the fourth part of this decree and elaborate, on the basis of the criteria and guidelines established by the regions, an area plan including a program of the necessary interventions, accompanied by a financial plan and the connected management and organizational model. The financial plan indicates, in particular, the available resources, those to be found, as well as the proceeds deriving from the application of the tariff on waste for the considered period.

**Art. 204**
**Existing management**
1. The subjects who exercise the service, including in-house, at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, shall continue to manage it until the establishment and organization of the integrated waste management service by the Area Authorities.
2. In relation to the expiry of the term of paragraph 15-bis of article 113 of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000, the Area Authority shall arrange for the new entrustments, in respect of the provisions of the fourth part of this decree, within nine months from the entry into force of the same fourth part.
3. If the Area Authority does not provide for the fulfillments of paragraphs 1 and 2 within the terms established therein, the President of the Regional Council shall exercise, giving communication to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea and to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste(*), the substitute powers, appointing an "ad acta" commissioner who starts the entrustment procedures within forty-five days, determining the deadlines for the individual procedural fulfillments. If the regional commissioner does not provide within the terms so established, the substitute powers preordained to the completion of the entrustment procedure fall to the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea.
4. Upon expiry, or early termination, of the managements of paragraph 1, the assets and plants of the already concessionaire companies are transferred directly to the granting local authority within the limits and according to the modalities provided for by the respective conventions of entrustment.

(*) Note: the text of art. 1, c. 5 of D.Lgs. 284/2006 is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Observatory on waste are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority on water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of April 3, 2006, are suppressed."

**Art. 205**
**Measures to increase separate collection**
1. In each optimal territorial area, a separate collection of urban waste must be ensured equal to the following minimum percentages of produced waste:
a) at least thirty-five percent by 31 December 2006;
b) at least forty-five percent by 31 December 2008;
c) at least sixty-five percent by 31 December 2012.
2. The wet organic fraction physically separated after collection and aimed at the overall recovery between material and energy, according to the criteria of economy, effectiveness, efficiency, and transparency of the system, contributes to the achievement of the objectives of paragraph 1.
3. In the case where at the level of the optimal territorial area the minimum objectives provided for by this article are not achieved, an additional twenty percent is applied to the tribute for the conferment of waste in landfills charged to the Area Authority, established by art. 3, paragraph 24, of law no. 549 of 28 December 1995, which shall distribute the burden among those municipalities of its territory that have not reached the percentages provided for in paragraph 1 on the basis of the separate collection quotas reached in the individual municipalities.
4. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities in agreement with the Unified Conference of article 8 of legislative decree no. 281 of 28 August 1997, the methodology and the calculation criteria of the percentages of paragraphs 1 and 2 are established, as well as the new determination of the correction coefficient of article 3, paragraph 29, of law no. 549 of 28 December 1995, in relation to the achievement of the objectives of paragraphs 1 and 2.
5. Until the issuance of the decree of paragraph 4, the implementing discipline of article 3, paragraphs from 24 to 40, of law no. 549 of 28 December 1995, continues to apply.
6. The regions by special law, and after agreement with the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, may indicate higher recycling and recovery objectives.

**Art. 206**
**Agreements, program contracts, incentives**
1. For the purpose of the implementation of the principles and objectives established by the provisions of the fourth part of this decree in order to pursue the rationalization and simplification of the procedures, with particular reference to small enterprises, the Minister of the Environment and for the Protection of the Land and Sea, in concert with the Minister of Productive Activities, and in agreement with the regions, the autonomous provinces, and the local authorities may stipulate specific agreements and program contracts with public entities, with sector companies, public or private subjects, and category associations. The agreements and program contracts have as their object:
a) the implementation of specific sector plans for the reduction, recovery, and optimization of waste flows;
b) the experimentation, promotion, implementation, and development of productive processes and clean technologies suitable to prevent or reduce the production of waste and their hazardousness and to optimize the recovery of waste;
c) the development of innovations in productive systems to favor methods of production of goods with less polluting and in any case recyclable materials;
d) the modifications of the productive cycle and the redesign of components, machinery, and control instruments;
e) the experimentation, promotion, and production of goods designed, packaged, and placed on the market in such a way as to reduce the quantity and hazardousness of waste and the risks of pollution;
f) the experimentation, promotion, and implementation of activities of reuse, recycling, and recovery of waste;
g) the adoption of techniques for the reuse and recycling of waste within the production plant;
h) the development of appropriate techniques and control systems for the elimination of waste and the hazardous substances contained therein;
i) the use by economic and public entities of materials recovered from the separate collection of urban waste;
l) the use of systems for controlling the recovery and reduction of waste.
2. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, may also stipulate specific agreements and program contracts with public and private entities or with trade associations to:
a) promote and favor the use of environmental certification systems as per Regulation (EC) No. 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001;
b) implement programs for the take-back of consumer goods at the end of their useful life for the purpose of reuse, recycling, and recovery of secondary raw materials, also through simplified procedures for the collection and transport of waste, which must in any case guarantee a high level of environmental protection.
3. The aforementioned agreements are stipulated in concert with the Minister for Agricultural and Forestry Policies if they concern activities related to agricultural production.
4. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, the financial resources to be allocated, on the basis of specific financing legislative provisions, to the agreements and program contracts referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 are identified, and the methods for their stipulation are established.
5. Pursuant to the communication 2002/412 of 17 July 2002 of the Commission of the European Communities, it is also possible to conclude environmental agreements that the Commission can use in the context of self-regulation, understood as encouragement or recognition of the same agreements, or of co-regulation, understood as a proposal to the legislator to use the agreements, when appropriate.

**Art. 207 * [ Supervisory Authority for Water Resources and Waste**
1. The Supervisory Authority for Water Resources and Waste referred to in Article 159, hereinafter referred to as the "Authority," shall ensure and supervise compliance with the principles and the pursuit of the objectives set out in Part Four of this decree, with particular reference to the efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, and transparency of the service.
2. The Authority, in addition to the attributions identified by this article, shall take over all the other competencies already assigned by art. 26 of Legislative Decree No. 22 of 5 February 1997, to the National Waste Observatory, which shall continue to operate until the entry into force of the regulation referred to in paragraph 4 of Article 159 of this decree.
3. The structure and composition of the Authority are governed by Article 159.
4. The authority shall carry out the functions provided for in Article 160.
5. For the performance of its tasks and in order to improve, increase, and adapt to European standards, to the best available technologies and to the best environmental practices the interventions in the field of inland water protection, waste, and remediation of polluted sites, as well as to increase the efficiency of said interventions also in terms of the ability to use resources deriving from co-financing, the Authority shall make use of the Technical Secretariat referred to in art. 1, paragraph 42, of Law No. 308 of 15 December 2004, within the limits of the human, instrumental, and financial resources provided for by current legislation. It may also make use of inspection and verification bodies and offices of other public administrations.]
*NOTE: article repealed by art. 1, c. 5 of Legislative Decree 284/2006 (G.U. n. 274 of 24/11/2006). The text is reported below:
"5. Articles 159, 160, and 207 of Legislative Decree No. 152 of 3 April 2006, are repealed and the Committee for the supervision of the use of water resources and the National Waste Observatory are reconstituted and exercise their respective functions. All references to the Supervisory Authority for water resources and waste contained in Legislative Decree No. 152 of 3 April 2006, are suppressed."

**CHAPTER IV - AUTHORIZATIONS AND REGISTRATIONS**

---
**Art. 208**
**Single Authorization for New Waste Disposal and Recovery Plants**
1. Persons intending to build and operate new waste disposal or recovery plants, including hazardous ones, must submit a specific application to the competent region for the territory, attaching the final project of the plant and the technical documentation required for the realization of the project itself by the provisions in force on urban planning, environmental protection, health, safety at work, and public hygiene. If the plant is to be subject to the environmental impact assessment procedure under current legislation, the communication of the project to the competent authority for said purposes must also be attached to the application; the terms referred to in paragraphs 3 and 8 remain suspended until the acquisition of the ruling on environmental compatibility pursuant to the second part of this decree.
2. The application of the national legislation implementing Directive 96/61/EC on integrated pollution prevention and control for plants falling within its scope of application remains unaffected, with particular reference to Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005.
3. Within thirty days of receipt of the application referred to in paragraph 1, the region identifies the person responsible for the procedure and convenes a specific services conference attended by the heads of the competent regional offices and representatives of the Area Authorities and interested local authorities. The applicant for authorization or their representative is also invited to participate, with at least twenty days' notice, in order to acquire documents, information, and clarifications. The documentation referred to in paragraph 1 is sent to the members of the services conference at least twenty days before the date set for the meeting; in the case of a majority decision, the resolution of adoption must provide an adequate and analytical motivation with respect to the dissenting opinions expressed during the conference.
4. Within ninety days of its convocation, the Services Conference shall:
a) proceed with the evaluation of the projects;
b) acquire and evaluate all elements relating to the compatibility of the project with environmental and territorial needs;
c) acquire, where provided for by current legislation, the environmental compatibility assessment;
d) transmit its conclusions with the relevant documents to the region.
5. For the technical examination of the application, the regions may use the regional agencies for environmental protection.
6. Within thirty days of receiving the conclusions of the services conference and on the basis of its findings, the region, in the case of a positive evaluation, approves the project and authorizes the construction and operation of the plant. The approval replaces for all purposes visas, opinions, authorizations, and concessions of regional, provincial, and municipal bodies, constitutes, where necessary, a variant to the urban planning instrument, and entails the declaration of public utility, urgency, and non-deferability of the works.
7. If the project concerns areas subject to constraints under Legislative Decree No. 42 of 22 January 2004, the provisions of Article 146 of said decree regarding authorization shall apply.
8. The procedure shall be concluded within one hundred and fifty days from the presentation of the application referred to in paragraph 1 with the issuance of the single authorization or with the reasoned denial thereof.
9. The terms referred to in paragraph 8 are interrupted, only once, by any requests for information made by the person responsible for the procedure to the interested party and start running again from the receipt of the elements provided by the interested party.
10. If the competent authority does not conclude the procedure for issuing the single authorization within the terms provided for in paragraph 8, the substitute power referred to in art. 5 of Legislative Decree No. 112 of 31 March 1998 shall apply.
11. The authorization identifies the conditions and prescriptions necessary to guarantee the implementation of the principles referred to in Article 178 and contains at least the following elements:
a) the types and quantities of waste to be disposed of or recovered;
b) the technical requirements with particular reference to the compatibility of the site, the equipment used, the types and maximum quantities of waste, and the conformity of the plant to the approved project;
---
c) the precautions to be taken regarding safety and environmental hygiene;
d) the location of the plant to be authorized;
e) the treatment and recovery method;
f) the prescriptions for the safety, closure, and site restoration operations of the plant;
g) the financial guarantees required, which must be provided only at the moment of the effective start of the plant's operation; to this end, the financial guarantees for the management of the landfill, including for the phase subsequent to its closure, must be provided in accordance with the provisions of art. 14 of Legislative Decree no. 36 of 13 January 2003;
h) the expiry date of the authorization, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 12;
i) the emission limits into the atmosphere for thermal treatment processes of waste, including those accompanied by energy recovery.
12. The authorization referred to in paragraph 1 is granted for a period of ten years and is renewable. To this end, at least one hundred and eighty days before the expiry of the authorization, a specific application must be submitted to the region, which decides before the expiry of the authorization itself. In any case, the activity can be continued until the express decision, subject to the extension of the financial guarantees provided.
13. When, following subsequent checks after the start-up of the plants, these are not found to be in conformity with the authorization referred to in this article, or the conditions and prescriptions contained in the same authorization are not satisfied, the latter is suspended, after a formal warning, for a maximum period of twelve months. Once this period has elapsed without the holder having complied with the provisions of the warning notice, the authorization is revoked.
14. The control and authorization of loading, unloading, transfer, deposit, and handling operations of waste in port areas are governed by the specific provisions of Law no. 84 of 28 January 1994, and of Legislative Decree no. 182 of 24 June 2003, implementing Directive 2000/59/EC on ship-generated waste, and by other provisions in force on the matter. In the case of transboundary shipment of waste, the authorization for embarkation and disembarkation operations cannot be issued if the applicant does not demonstrate that they have fulfilled the obligations under Article 194 of this decree.
15. Mobile disposal or recovery plants, excluding mobile plants that carry out the dehydration of sludge generated by purification plants and reintroduce the water at the head of the purification process where they operate, with the exclusion of mere volume reduction and separation of extraneous fractions, are authorized, definitively, by the region where the interested party has its registered office or the foreign company owning the plant has its representative office. For the performance of individual activity campaigns on the national territory, the interested party, at least sixty days before the installation of the plant, must notify the region in whose territory the chosen site is located of the specific details relating to the activity campaign, attaching the authorization referred to in paragraph 1 and the registration in the National Register of Environmental Managers, as well as any further documentation requested. The region may adopt supplementary prescriptions or may prohibit the activity with a reasoned measure if its performance in the specific site is not compatible with the protection of the environment or public health.
16. The provisions of this article also apply to proceedings in progress at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, except for those for which the environmental impact assessment procedure has been completed.
17. Without prejudice to the obligation to keep loading and unloading registers by the subjects referred to in Article 190 and the prohibition of mixing under Article 187, the provisions of this article do not apply to temporary storage carried out in compliance with the conditions established by Article 183, paragraph 1, letter m). The same exclusion also applies when the temporary storage activity at the place of production is entrusted by the producer to another subject authorized for waste management. The conferment of waste by the producer to the person entrusted with temporary storage constitutes fulfillment of the obligations under Article 188, paragraph 3. In this case, the annotations by both the producer and the person entrusted with temporary storage must be made within twenty-four hours.
---
18. The authorization referred to in this article must be communicated, by the administration that issues it, to the Register referred to in Article 212, paragraph 1, which ensures its inclusion in a national list, accessible to the public, of the identifying elements referred to in Article 212, paragraph 23, without new or greater charges for public finance.
19. In the event of incidents affecting the authorization, these are communicated, after notice to the interested party, as well as to the same, also to the Register.
20. The procedures referred to in this article also apply to the realization of substantial variants during operation or exercise that involve modifications as a result of which the plants are no longer compliant with the authorization issued.

**Art. 209**
**Renewal of authorizations for companies with environmental certification**
1. In compliance with community regulations, during the completion of the procedures for the renewal of authorizations for the operation of a plant, or for the renewal of registration in the Register referred to in Article 212, companies that are registered under Regulation (EC) No. 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 (Emas) and operate within the Ecolabel system under Regulation No. 1980 of 17 July 2000, or are UNI-EN ISO 14001 certified, may replace such authorizations or the new registration certificate with a self-certification submitted to the competent authorities, pursuant to the Decree of the President of the Republic of 28 December 2000, No. 445.
2. The self-certification referred to in paragraph 1 must be accompanied by a certified copy of the registration certificate obtained under the regulations and parametric standards referred to in the same paragraph 1, as well as by a declaration of continuation of activities, attesting to the conformity of the company, its means, and plants with legislative and regulatory prescriptions, with an attached certification of the outcome of tests for this purpose, where provided.
3. The self-certification and the related documents, as per paragraphs 1 and 2, replace for all purposes the authorization for the continuation, or for the exercise of the activities provided for by the rules referred to in paragraph 1, and to them apply, insofar as compatible, the provisions of the Decree of the President of the Republic of 26 April 1992, No. 300. The sanctioning provisions of art. 21 of Law No. 241 of 7 August 1990 also apply.
4. The self-certification and related documents maintain the substitutive effectiveness referred to in paragraph 3 for a maximum period of one hundred and eighty days following the date of communication to the interested party of the revocation, for any reason, of the registration obtained under the regulations and parametric standards referred to in paragraph 1.
5. Without prejudice to the application of specific sanctions and unless the act constitutes a more serious crime, in the case of ascertained falsity of the statements contained in the self-certification and its related documents, art. 483 of the penal code applies to anyone who has signed the documentation referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2.
6. The application of the national legislation implementing Directive 96/61/EC on integrated pollution prevention and control for plants falling within its scope of application remains unaffected, with particular reference to Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005.
7. The enabling titles referred to in this article must be communicated, by the administration that issues them, to the Register referred to in Article 212, paragraph 1, which ensures their insertion in a national list, accessible to the public, of the identifying elements referred to in Article 212, paragraph 23, without new or greater charges for public finance.

**Art. 210**
**Authorizations in special cases**
1. Those who, at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, have not yet obtained authorization for the management of the plant, or intend, in any case, to request a modification of the management authorization they possess, or request its renewal, shall submit an application to the competent region for the territory, which shall decide within ninety days of the request. The procedure referred to in this paragraph also applies to those who intend to start a waste recovery or disposal activity in an existing plant, previously used or adapted for other activities. If the new recovery or disposal activity is subject to an environmental impact assessment, the provisions of the second part of this decree for substantial modifications apply.
---
2. The application of the national legislation implementing Directive 96/61/EC on integrated pollution prevention and control for plants falling within its scope of application remains unaffected, with particular reference to Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005.
3. The authorization identifies the conditions and prescriptions necessary to guarantee the implementation of the principles referred to in Article 178 and contains at least the following elements:
a) the types and quantities of waste to be disposed of or recovered;
b) the technical requirements, with particular reference to the compatibility of the site, the equipment used, the types and maximum quantities of waste, and the conformity of the plant to the new requested form of management;
c) the precautions to be taken regarding safety and environmental hygiene;
d) the location of the plant to be authorized;
e) the treatment and recovery method;
f) the emission limits into the atmosphere for thermal treatment processes of waste, also accompanied by energy recovery;
g) the prescriptions for the operations of securing, closing, and restoring the site;
h) financial guarantees, where provided for by current legislation, or other equivalent guarantees; such guarantees are in any case reduced by fifty percent for companies registered under Regulation (EC) No. 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 (Emas), and by forty percent in the case of companies possessing environmental certification according to the Uni En Iso 14001 standard;
i) the expiry date of the authorization, in accordance with the provisions of Article 208, paragraph 12.
4. When, following subsequent checks after the start-up of the plants, the construction of which has been authorized, they are not found to be compliant with the aforementioned authorization, or the conditions and prescriptions contained in the authorization for the exercise of the operations referred to in paragraph 1 are not satisfied, the latter is suspended, after a formal warning, for a maximum period of twelve months. Once this term has elapsed without the holder having complied with the provisions of the warning, the authorization itself is revoked.
5. The provisions of this article do not apply to temporary storage carried out in compliance with the conditions of Article 183, paragraph 1, letter m), which is subject only to the requirements related to the loading and unloading register under Article 190 and the prohibition of mixing under Article 187. The same exclusion also applies when the temporary storage activity at the place of production is entrusted by the producer to another subject authorized for waste management. The conferment of waste by the producer to the person entrusted with temporary storage constitutes fulfillment of the obligations under Article 188, paragraph 3. In such a case, the annotations by both the producer and the person entrusted with temporary storage must be made within twenty-four hours.
6. For waste in port areas and for embarkation and disembarkation operations in the case of transboundary shipment of waste, the provisions of Article 208, paragraph 14, apply.
7. For mobile plants, as referred to in Article 208, paragraph 15, the provisions provided therein apply.
8. If the competent authority fails to conclude the procedure for issuing the authorization within the terms provided for in paragraph 1, the substitute power under art. 5 of Legislative Decree No. 112 of 31 March 1998 applies.
9. The authorizations referred to in this article must be communicated, by the administration that issues them, to the Register referred to in Article 212, paragraph 1, which ensures their insertion in a national list, accessible to the public, of the identifying elements referred to in Article 212, paragraph 23, without new or greater charges for public finance.

**Art. 211**
**Authorization of research and experimentation plants**
1. The terms referred to in Articles 208 and 210 are reduced by half for the authorization of the construction and operation of research and experimentation plants, provided that the following conditions are met:
---
a) the management activities of the plants do not result in economic profit;
b) the plants have a capacity not exceeding 5 tons per day, unless exceptions are justified by the need to conduct tests on plants characterized by innovations, which must however be limited to the duration of such tests.
2. The duration of the authorization under paragraph 1 is two years, subject to extension which may be granted after an annual verification of the results achieved and may not in any case exceed another two years.
3. If the project or the construction of the plant have not been approved and authorized within the term specified in paragraph 1, the interested party may submit a request to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, who shall decide within the following sixty days in concert with the Ministers for Production Activities and for Education, University and Research. In this case, the financial guarantee is provided in favor of the State.
4. In case of risk of pathogenic agents or of unknown and dangerous substances from a health point of view, the authorization under paragraph 1 is issued by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, who shall decide within the following sixty days, in concert with the Ministers for Production Activities, Health, and Education, University and Research.
5. The authorization referred to in this article must be communicated, by the administration that issues it, to the Register referred to in Article 212, paragraph 1, which shall ensure its insertion in a national, publicly accessible list of the identifying elements referred to in Article 212, paragraph 23, without new or greater costs for public finance.

**Art. 212**
**National Register of Environmental Managers**
1. The National Register of Environmental Managers, hereinafter referred to as the Register, is established at the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory. It is structured into a National Committee, with its headquarters at the same Ministry, and into regional and provincial Sections, established at the Chambers of Commerce, Industry, Crafts, and Agriculture of the regional capitals and of the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano. The members of the National Committee and of the Regional and Provincial Sections hold office for five years.
2. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, special sections of the National Committee are established for each single activity subject to registration with the Register, without new or greater charges on public finance, and their composition and competencies are determined. The National Committee of the Register has deliberative power and is composed of nineteen members with proven and documented technical-economic or legal experience in environmental matters, appointed by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and designated respectively:
a) two by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, one of whom serves as President;
b) one by the Minister for Production Activities, with the function of Vice-President;
c) one by the Minister of Health;
d) one by the Minister of Economy and Finance
e) one by the Minister of Infrastructure and Transport;
f) one by the Minister of the Interior;
g) three by the regions;
h) one by the Italian Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry, Crafts, and Agriculture;
i) six by the most representative organizations of the interested economic categories, of which two are from the organizations representing the road haulage category and two from the associations representing waste managers;
l) two by the most representative trade union organizations.
3. The Regional and Provincial Sections of the Register are established by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and are composed of:
a) the President of the Chamber of Commerce, Industry, Crafts and Agriculture or a member of the Chamber Council designated for this purpose by the same, with the functions of President;
b) an official or manager with proven experience in environmental matters designated by the region or the autonomous province, with the functions of Vice-President;
c) an official or manager with proven experience in environmental matters, designated by the Regional Union of Provinces or by the autonomous province;
d) an expert with proven experience in environmental matters, designated by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory;
---
e) by two experts designated by the most representative organizations of the economic categories;
f) by two experts designated by the most representative trade union organizations.
4. The functions of the National Committee and the Regional Sections of the Register are carried out, until the expiry of their mandate, respectively by the National Committee and the Regional Sections of the National Register of companies that carry out waste management, as already provided for in art. 30 of legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997, integrated, without new or greater burdens on public finance, with the new components identified pursuant to, respectively, paragraph 2, letter l), and paragraph 3, letters e) and f), in compliance with the provisions of paragraph 16.
5. Registration in the Register is a prerequisite for carrying out the activities of collection and transport of non-hazardous waste produced by third parties, collection and transport of hazardous waste, remediation of sites, remediation of goods containing asbestos, trade and intermediation of waste without holding the waste itself, as well as management of third-party disposal and recovery plants and management of mobile waste disposal and recovery plants, within the limits referred to in article 208, paragraph 15. The organizations referred to in articles 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), 223, 224, 228, 233, 234, 235 and 236 are exempt from the obligation under this paragraph, provided they have documentary or accounting evidence that they perform similar functions, without prejudice to the documentary and accounting obligations required of the aforementioned subjects by current regulations.
6. The registration must be renewed every five years and constitutes the title for the exercise of the activities of collection, transport, trade, and intermediation of waste; for the other activities, the registration enables the management of plants whose operation has been authorized or the carrying out of activities subject to registration.
7. Companies that carry out waste collection and transport activities, companies that carry out waste intermediation and trade activities, without holding the waste, and companies that carry out the management of mobile disposal and recovery plants must provide suitable financial guarantees in favor of the State. Such guarantees are reduced by fifty percent for companies registered under Regulation (EC) No. 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 (Emas), and by forty percent in the case of companies possessing environmental certification under the Uni En Iso 14001 standard.
8. Companies that carry out the collection and transport of their own non-hazardous waste as an ordinary and regular activity, as well as companies that transport their own hazardous waste in quantities not exceeding thirty kilograms per day or thirty liters per day, are not subject to the provision of financial guarantees referred to in paragraph 7 and are registered in the National Register of Environmental Managers following a simple written request to the territorially competent section of the Register, without the request itself being subject to evaluation regarding financial capacity and technical suitability and without the obligation to appoint a technical manager. Such companies are required to pay an annual registration fee of 50 euros, which can be redetermined pursuant to art. 21 of the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 28 April 1998, no. 406.
9. Companies that carry out management activities of fixed disposal and recovery plants owned by third parties, companies that carry out site remediation and remediation of goods containing asbestos must provide suitable financial guarantees in favor of the territorially competent region, in compliance with the general criteria of article 195, paragraph 2, letter h). Such guarantees are reduced by fifty percent for companies registered under Regulation (EC) No. 761/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2001 (Emas), and by forty percent in the case of companies possessing environmental certification under the Uni En Iso 14001 standard. The guarantees referred to in this paragraph must in any case be provided based on the following distinction:
a) companies that carry out the management of fixed disposal and recovery plants owned by third parties must provide financial guarantees in favor of the region for each plant that is managed;
b) companies that carry out the remediation of sites and of goods containing asbestos must provide financial guarantees in favor of the region for each remediation intervention.
10. With a decree from the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities, Infrastructure and Transport, and Economy and Finance,
---
finance, having heard the opinion of the National Committee, to be issued within ninety days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the attributions and organizational methods of the Register, the requirements, terms, and methods of registration, the annual registration fees, as well as the methods and amounts of the financial guarantees to be provided in favor of the State, shall be defined. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 28 April 1998, no. 406, shall continue to apply, where compatible. The decree referred to in this paragraph is based on the following principles:
a) identification of registration requirements, valid for all sections, in order to standardize the procedures;
b) coordination with the current legislation on road haulage, consistent with the purpose of letter a);
c) uniform treatment of the components of the Regional Sections, to ensure operational efficiency;
d) effective coverage of expenses through secretarial fees and annual registration fees.
11. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, after consulting the State-Regions Conference, the general criteria for the definition of financial guarantees to be provided in favor of the regions are established.
12. A special Section is established at the Register, in which companies from European and non-European countries that carry out recovery operations of ferrous and non-ferrous scrap, listed in article 183, paragraph 1, letter u), for the production of secondary raw materials for the steel and metallurgical industry, are registered, in compliance with the conditions and national, community, and international technical standards identified by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory. Until the issuance of the aforesaid decree, the conditions and technical standards reported in Annex 1 to the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 5 February 1998 shall continue to apply. Registration is carried out following a communication to the register by the interested foreign company, accompanied by a certificate of conformity to these conditions and technical standards issued by the competent public authority in the country of origin. The operating procedures of the special section are established by the National Committee of the Register; pending such definition, registration is replaced for all purposes by the communication accompanied by the certificate of conformity from the competent authority.
13. Registration in the Register and the measures of suspension, revocation, forfeiture, and annulment of the registration, as well as the acceptance, revocation, and release of the financial guarantees to be provided in favor of the State are decided by the Regional Section of the Register of the region where the interested company has its legal headquarters, based on current legislation and the directives issued by the National Committee.
14. Until the issuance of the decrees referred to in this article, the provisions already in force on the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree shall continue to apply.
15. Interested parties may appeal to the National Committee of the Register against the decisions of the Regional Sections of the Register, within a peremptory term of thirty days from the notification of the decisions themselves.
16. The costs for the functioning of the National Committee and the Regional and Provincial Sections are covered by the revenues from secretarial fees and annual registration fees, according to the provisions, also relating to the methods of payment and use, which will be determined by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance. The integration of the National Committee and the Regional and Provincial Sections with the representatives referred to in paragraphs 2, letter l), and 3, letters e) and f), is subject to the entry into force of the aforementioned decree. Until the issuance of the said decree, the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 20 December 1993 and the provisions of the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 13 December 1995 shall apply.
17. The regulatory discipline of cases in which, pursuant to articles 19 and 20 of law no. 241 of 7 August 1990, the exercise of a private activity can be undertaken on the basis of the declaration of the start of the activity does not apply to registration applications and acts within the competence of the Register.
18. Companies that carry out collection and transport of waste subject to simplified procedures pursuant to article 216, and actually sent for recycling and
---
recovery, and companies that transport waste indicated in the green list of Regulation (EEC) 259/93 of 1 February 1993 are not subject to the financial guarantees referred to in paragraph 8 and are registered with the Register by sending a communication of the start of activity to the competent regional or provincial Section. This communication must be renewed every five years and must be accompanied by appropriate documentation prepared pursuant to art. 13 of the ministerial decree of 28 April 1998, no. 406, as well as the deliberations of the National Committee from which the following elements result:
a) the quantity, nature, origin, and destination of the waste;
b) the correspondence of the technical characteristics and type of vehicle used to the requirements established by the Register in relation to the types of waste to be transported;
c) compliance with the conditions and possession of the subjective, technical suitability, and financial capacity requirements.
19. Within ten days of receiving the communication of the start of activity, the Regional and Provincial Sections acknowledge the registration and enter the companies referred to in paragraph 18 in special lists, communicating this to the National Committee, the territorially competent province, and the interested party.
20. Companies registered with the Register under the ordinary procedure pursuant to paragraph 5 are exempt from the obligation of communication under paragraph 18 if the performance of the activity of collection and transport of waste subject to simplified procedures pursuant to article 216 and actually sent for recycling and recovery does not involve changes in the category, class, and type of waste for which these companies are registered.
21. The provisions of art. 21 of Law no. 241 of 7 August 1990 apply to the communication referred to in paragraph 18. For companies that carry out the activities referred to in paragraph 18 following a communication accompanied by incomplete or unsuitable documentation, the provision of article 256, paragraph 1, shall apply.
22. The signatories of the agreements and program contracts provided for in Article 181 and Article 206 are registered in a special section of the Register, following a simple written request and without being subject to the financial guarantees referred to in paragraphs 8 and 9.
23. Registers of companies authorized for waste management are established at the National Committee, updated every thirty days, in which, upon request, the identifying elements of the company are inserted, which can be consulted by operators according to the procedures established by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in compliance with the principles of Legislative Decree no. 196 of 30 June 2003. The registers are public and, within twelve months from the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, are made available to the public, without charge, also electronically, according to the criteria established by the aforementioned decree. The authorizing administrations shall communicate to the National Committee, immediately after issuing the authorization, the company name of the authorized company, the activity for which the authorization is issued, the waste subject to the management activity, the expiry of the authorization and subsequently report any variation of the aforementioned information that occurs during the validity of the authorization itself. In case of a delay by the Administration of more than thirty days from the issuance of the authorization, the interested company may send an authentic copy of the provision, also electronically, to the National Committee, which will arrange for its inclusion in the registers.
24. Companies that carry out non-hazardous waste disposal activities at the place of production of the waste itself pursuant to Article 215 are registered in a special register with the procedures provided for in the same article.
25. Companies that carry out waste recovery operations pursuant to Article 216 are registered in a special register with the procedures provided for in the same article.
26. For the keeping of the registers referred to in paragraphs 22, 23, 24, and 25, the interested parties are required to pay an annual registration fee, for each type of register, equal to 50 euros, which can be re-determined pursuant to art. 21 of the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 28 April 1998, no. 406. The fees referred to in paragraphs 8, 24, and 25 are paid, according to the methods referred to in paragraph 16, to the competent Regional Section of the Register, which proceeds to account for them separately and to use them entirely for the implementation of the same paragraphs.
27. The keeping of the registers referred to in paragraphs 22 and 23 shall begin from the entry into force of the decree referred to in paragraph 16.
28. The implementation of this article must not result in new or greater burdens on public finance.
---
**Art. 213**
**Integrated Environmental Authorizations**
1. The integrated environmental authorizations issued pursuant to Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005, replace for all purposes, according to the procedures provided therein:
a) the authorizations referred to in this chapter;
b) the communication referred to in Article 216, limited to activities not falling under category 5 of Annex I of Legislative Decree No. 59 of 18 February 2005, which, if carried out under a simplified procedure, are excluded from the integrated environmental authorization, without prejudice to the possibility of subsequently using the simplified procedures provided for in Chapter V.
2. The provisions of Articles 214 and 216 of this decree apply to the transport of waste from the green list of Regulation (EEC) No. 259 of 1 February 1993, destined for the plants referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.

**CHAPTER V - SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURES**

**Art. 214**
**Determination of activities and characteristics of waste for admission to simplified procedures**
1. The simplified procedures of this Chapter must in any case guarantee a high level of environmental protection and effective controls.
2. By decrees of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities, Health and, for agricultural waste and activities that produce fertilizers, with the Minister of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, the rules are adopted for each type of activity, which establish the types and quantities of waste, and the conditions under which the disposal activities of non-hazardous waste carried out by producers at the place of production and the recovery activities referred to in Annex C to the fourth part of this decree are subject to the simplified procedures of Articles 215 and 216. With the same procedure, the aforementioned technical standards and conditions are updated.
3. Paragraph 2 can also be implemented according to the regulations in force for the program agreements referred to in Articles 181 and 206 and in compliance with community guidelines on the matter.
4. The rules and conditions referred to in paragraph 2 and the simplified procedures must ensure that the types or quantities of waste and the disposal or recovery procedures and methods are such as not to constitute a danger to human health and not to harm the environment. In particular, without prejudice to the discipline of Legislative Decree No. 133 of 11 May 2005, to access the simplified procedures, the thermal treatment and energy recovery activities must also respect the following conditions:
a) fuels from urban waste or specific special waste identified by homogeneous fractions are used;
b) the emission limits are not lower than those established for waste incineration and co-incineration plants by current legislation, with particular reference to Legislative Decree No. 133 of 11 May 2005;
c) the production of a minimum share of transformation of the calorific value of the waste into useful energy calculated on an annual basis is guaranteed;
d) the conditions, technical standards, and specific prescriptions of Articles 215, paragraph 2, and 216, paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 are respected.
5. Until the issuance of the decrees referred to in paragraph 2 regarding recovery activities, the provisions of the decrees of the Minister of the Environment of 5 February 1998 and 12 June 2002, no. 161 shall continue to apply.
6. The issuance of the rules and conditions referred to in paragraph 2 must first concern the waste indicated in the green list of Annex II of Regulation (EEC) No. 259 of 1 February 1993.
7. For the keeping of the registers referred to in Articles 215, paragraph 3, and 216, paragraph 3, and for the performance of periodic checks, the interested party is required to pay the annual registration fee to the Regional Section of the Register as per Article 212, paragraph 26.
8. The construction of plants that recover waste in compliance with the conditions,
---
prescriptions and technical standards referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3 is regulated by national and community legislation on air quality and atmospheric pollution from industrial plants. The authorization for the operation in the aforesaid plants of waste recovery operations not identified pursuant to this article remains, however, subject to the provisions of Articles 208, 209, 210 and 211.
9. To the reports, communications, and applications governed by this Chapter, the provisions relating to private activities subject to the discipline of Articles 19 and 20 of Law No. 241 of 7 August 1990 shall apply, where compatible. The provisions of art. 21 of Law No. 241 of 7 August 1990 shall also apply. Provided that the conditions, technical standards, and specific prescriptions adopted pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of Article 216 are respected, the exercise of waste recovery operations may be undertaken ninety days after the communication of the start of activity to the competent section of the Register referred to in Article 212.

**Art. 215**
**Self-disposal**
1. Provided that the technical standards and specific prescriptions of Article 214, paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 are respected, the non-hazardous waste disposal activities carried out at the place of production of the waste itself may be undertaken ninety days after the communication of the start of activity to the competent Regional Section of the Register, referred to in Article 212, which gives notice to the territorially competent province within ten days of receiving the communication itself.
2. The technical standards of paragraph 1 provide in particular:
a) the type, quantity, and characteristics of the waste to be disposed of;
b) the cycle of origin of the waste;
c) the conditions for the construction and operation of the plants;
d) the characteristics of the disposal plant;
e) the quality of emissions and water discharges into the environment.
3. The Regional Section of the Register records in a special register the companies that make the communication of the start of activity and within the term of paragraph 1 verifies ex officio the existence of the required prerequisites and requirements. To this end, a report must be attached to the communication of the start of activity, signed by the legal representative of the company, from which the following must result:
a) compliance with the conditions and specific technical standards of paragraph 1;
b) compliance with technical safety standards and authorization procedures provided for by current legislation.
4. Should the Regional Section of the Register ascertain the non-compliance with the technical standards and conditions of paragraph 1, the same Section proposes to the province to order, with a reasoned measure, the prohibition of the start or continuation of the activity, unless the interested party proceeds to conform said activity and its effects to the current legislation within the term and according to the prescriptions established by the administration.
5. The communication referred to in paragraph 1 must be renewed every five years and, in any case, in the event of substantial modification of the self-disposal operations.
6. The self-disposal activities of hazardous waste and the landfilling of waste remain subject to the provisions of Articles 208, 209, 210, and 211.

**Art. 216**
**Recovery operations**
1. Provided that the technical standards and specific prescriptions of Article 214, paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 are respected, the exercise of waste recovery operations may be undertaken ninety days after the communication of the start of activity to the competent Regional Section of the Register, referred to in Article 212, which gives notice to the territorially competent province within ten days of receiving the communication itself. In the cases of electrical and electronic waste as per Article 227, paragraph 1, letter a), end-of-life vehicles as per Article 227, paragraph 1, letter c), and co-incineration plants, the start of activities is subject to a preventive inspection by the competent province for the territory, to be carried out within sixty days from the presentation of the aforementioned communication.
2. The conditions and technical standards of paragraph 1, in relation to each type of
---
activity, provide in particular:
a) for non-hazardous waste:
1) the maximum quantities that can be used;
2) the origin, types, and characteristics of the waste that can be used, as well as the specific conditions under which the same activities are subject to the discipline provided by this article;
3) the necessary prescriptions to ensure that, in relation to the types or quantities of waste and recovery methods, the waste itself is recovered without danger to human health and without using processes or methods that could harm the environment;
b) for hazardous waste:
1) the maximum quantities that can be used;
2) the origin, types, and characteristics of the waste;
3) the specific conditions referring to the limit values of hazardous substances contained in the waste, to the emission limit values for each type of waste and for the type of activity and plant used, also in relation to other emissions present on site;
4) the other requirements necessary to carry out different forms of recovery;
5) the necessary prescriptions to ensure that, in relation to the type and quantities of hazardous substances contained in the waste and to the recovery methods, the waste itself is recovered without danger to human health and without using processes and methods that could harm the environment.
3. The regional section of the Register enrolls in a special register the companies that make the start of activity communication and, within the term referred to in paragraph 1, verifies ex officio the existence of the prerequisites and required requirements. To this end, a report must be attached to the start of activity communication, signed by the company's legal representative, from which the following must result:
a) compliance with the technical standards and specific conditions referred to in paragraph 1;
b) possession of the subjective requirements requested for waste management;
c) the recovery activities intended to be carried out;
d) the establishment, recovery capacity, and treatment or combustion cycle in which the waste itself is intended to be recovered, as well as the use of any mobile plants;
e) the product characteristics of the products deriving from the recovery cycles.
4. If the competent Regional Section of the Register ascertains non-compliance with the technical standards and conditions referred to in paragraph 1, the same section proposes to the province to order, with a reasoned measure, the prohibition of the start or continuation of the activity, unless the interested party proceeds to conform said activity and its effects to the current legislation within the term and according to the prescriptions established by the administration.
5. The communication referred to in paragraph 1 must be renewed every five years and in any case of substantial modification of the recovery operations.
6. The simplified procedure of this article replaces, limited to the qualitative and quantitative variations of the emissions determined by the waste identified by the technical standards of paragraph 1 which already set the emission limits in relation to the recovery activities of the same, the authorization of Article 269 in case of substantial modification of the plant.
7. The simplified provisions of this article do not apply to the recovery activities of urban waste, with the exception of:
a) activities for the recycling and recovery of secondary raw material and the production of quality compost from waste from separate collection;
b) urban waste treatment activities to obtain waste-derived fuel carried out in compliance with the technical standards of paragraph 1.
8. Without prejudice to compliance with the emission limits into the atmosphere as per Article 214, paragraph 4, letter b), and the limits of other polluting emissions established by current provisions, and without prejudice to the observance of other constraints for the protection of health and environmental profiles, within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, shall determine the methods, conditions, and measures relating to the granting of financial incentives provided for by current legislative provisions in favor of the use of waste as fuel to produce electricity, also taking into account the
---
prevalent public interest in energy recovery in urban waste power plants subject to preventive treatment operations aimed at producing fuel from waste and in compliance with the provisions of Directive 2001/77/EC of 27 September 2001 and its implementing legislative decree No. 387 of 29 December 2003.
9. With specific technical standards adopted pursuant to paragraph 1, to be published within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, a list of non-hazardous waste most used in the production sectors is identified in observance of the following criteria:
a) diffusion of use in the manufacturing sector based on national accounting data or sector studies or specific waste management programs approved pursuant to the provisions of the fourth part of this decree;
b) use consistent with the best available techniques without danger to human health and without using processes or methods that could harm the environment;
c) use in authorized plants.
10. The waste identified pursuant to paragraph 9 is subject only to the provisions of articles 188, paragraph 3, 189, 190 and 193 as well as the related sanctioning norms contained in the fourth part of this decree. On the basis of the information in article 189, the Cadastre compiles for each province a list of the plants referred to in paragraph 9.
11. The ordinary rules for recovery and disposal apply in full to the activities referred to in this article if the waste is not destined for effective and objective recovery.
12. The conditions and technical standards relating to hazardous waste as per paragraph 1 are communicated to the Commission of the European Union three months before their entry into force.
13. The storage operations of hazardous waste identified pursuant to this article are subject to the simplified procedures of communication of start of activity only if carried out at the plant where the recycling and recovery operations provided for in points R1 to R9 of Annex C to the fourth part of this decree take place.
14. Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 13, the technical standards of paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 establish the plant characteristics of the storage centers for non-hazardous waste not located at the plants where the recycling and recovery operations identified in points R1 to R9 of Annex C to the fourth part of this decree are carried out, as well as the storage methods and the maximum terms within which the waste must be sent to the aforementioned operations.
15. The communications already made at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree pursuant to art. 33, paragraph 1, of legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997, and the consequent registrations in the registers kept by the Provinces remain valid and effective until the expiry date referred to in paragraph 5 of the same article 33.

**TITLE II - MANAGEMENT OF PACKAGING**

**Art. 217**
**Scope of application**
1. This title governs the management of packaging and packaging waste both to prevent and reduce its impact on the environment and to ensure a high level of environmental protection, and to ensure the functioning of the market, as well as to avoid discrimination against imported products, prevent the emergence of obstacles to trade and distortions of competition, and ensure the maximum possible return from packaging and packaging waste, in accordance with Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 1994, as integrated and amended by Directive 2004/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, of which the fourth part of this decree constitutes transposition into the internal legal order. The management systems must be open to the participation of the interested economic operators.
2. The discipline of paragraph 1 concerns the management of all packaging placed on the national market and all packaging waste resulting from its use, used or
---
produced by industries, businesses, offices, shops, services, households, for any reason, whatever the materials they are composed of. The operators of the respective packaging supply chains as a whole guarantee, according to the principles of "shared responsibility," that the environmental impact of packaging and packaging waste is reduced to a minimum throughout the entire life cycle.
3. The existing requirements regarding the quality of packaging, such as those relating to the safety, health protection, and hygiene of the packaged products, as well as the existing provisions on transport and hazardous waste, remain in force.

**Art. 218**
**Definitions**
1. For the purposes of applying this title, the following definitions apply:
a) packaging: the product, composed of materials of any nature, used to contain certain goods, from raw materials to finished products, to protect them, to allow their handling and delivery from the producer to the consumer or user, to ensure their presentation, as well as disposable items used for the same purpose;
b) sales packaging or primary packaging: packaging designed to constitute, at the point of sale, a sales unit for the final user or consumer;
c) multiple packaging or secondary packaging: packaging designed to constitute, at the point of sale, the grouping of a certain number of sales units, regardless of whether it is sold as such to the final user or consumer, or whether it serves only to facilitate the stocking of shelves at the point of sale. It can be removed from the product without altering its characteristics;
d) transport packaging or tertiary packaging: packaging designed to facilitate the handling and transport of goods, from raw materials to finished products, of a certain number of sales units or multiple packagings to prevent their handling and transport-related damage, excluding containers for road, rail, sea, and air transport;
e) reusable packaging: packaging or a component of packaging that has been conceived and designed to withstand a minimum number of trips or rotations within a reuse circuit during its life cycle.
f) packaging waste: any packaging or packaging material, falling under the definition of waste in Article 183, paragraph 1, letter a), excluding production residues;
g) management of packaging waste: the management activities referred to in Article 183, paragraph 1, letter d);
h) prevention: the reduction, in particular through the development of non-polluting products and technologies, of the quantity and harmfulness to the environment of both the materials and substances used in packaging and packaging waste, and of packaging and packaging waste at the production process stage, as well as in the marketing, distribution, use, and post-consumption management stages;
i) reuse: any operation in which packaging conceived and designed to be able to complete, during its life cycle, a minimum number of movements or rotations is refilled or reused for a use identical to that for which it was conceived, with or without the support of auxiliary products present on the market that allow the packaging itself to be filled; such reused packaging becomes packaging waste when it ceases to be reused;
l) recycling: reprocessing in a production process of packaging waste for its original function or for other purposes, including organic recycling and excluding energy recovery;
m) recovery of waste generated from packaging: operations that use packaging waste to generate secondary raw materials, products, or fuels, through mechanical, thermal, chemical, or biological treatments, including sorting, and, in particular, the operations provided for in Annex C to the fourth part of this decree;
n) energy recovery: the use of combustible packaging waste as a means to produce energy through thermal valorization with or without other waste but with heat recovery;
o) organic recycling: the aerobic (composting) or anaerobic (biomethanation) treatment, by microorganisms and under controlled conditions, of the
---
biodegradable parts of packaging waste, with the production of stabilized organic residues or biogas with energy recovery, excluding landfilling, which cannot be considered a form of organic recycling;
p) disposal: any operation aimed at permanently removing packaging or packaging waste from the economic and/or collection circuit and, in particular, the operations provided for in Annex B to the fourth part of this decree;
q) economic operators: producers, users, recoverers, recyclers, end-users, public administrations, and managers;
r) producers: suppliers of packaging materials, manufacturers, processors, and importers of empty packaging and packaging materials;
s) users: merchants, distributors, fillers, users of packaging, and importers of filled packaging;
t) public administrations and managers: the subjects and entities that provide for the organization, control, and management of the collection, transport, recovery, and disposal service for urban waste in the forms referred to in the fourth part of this decree or their concessionaires;
u) end-user: the subject who, in the exercise of their professional activity, purchases, as capital goods, packaged articles or goods;
v) consumer: the subject who, outside the exercise of a professional activity, purchases or imports for their own use packaging, packaged articles or goods;
z) voluntary agreement: a formally concluded agreement between the competent public administrations and the interested economic sectors, open to all interested parties, which regulates the means, instruments, and actions to achieve the objectives of Article 220;
aa) supply chain: an economic and productive organization that carries out its activity, from the beginning of the processing cycle to the finished packaging product, as well as carrying out recovery and recycling activities at the end of the life of the packaging itself;
bb) take-back: the operation of recovering primary packaging waste or waste otherwise conferred to the public service, as well as assimilated special waste, managed by the operators of urban hygiene services or similar;
cc) return: the operation of returning used secondary and tertiary packaging from the user or end-user, excluding the consumer, to the supplier of the goods or distributor and, backwards, along the supply logistics chain up to the producer of the packaging itself;
dd) used packaging: secondary or tertiary packaging already used and intended to be taken-back or returned.
2. The definition of packaging as per letters a) to e) of paragraph 1 is also based on the interpretative criteria indicated in art. 3 of Directive 94/62/EC, as amended by Directive 2004/12/EC and on the illustrative examples reported in Annex E to the fourth part of this decree.

**Art. 219**
**Guiding criteria for the management of packaging waste**
1. The management of packaging and packaging waste is guided by the following general principles:
a) encouragement and promotion of source prevention of the quantity and hazardousness in the manufacturing of packaging and packaging waste, especially through initiatives, including of an economic nature in accordance with the principles of Community law, aimed at promoting the development of clean technologies and reducing the production and use of packaging at the source, as well as favoring the production of reusable packaging and its concrete reuse;
b) encouragement of recycling and recovery of raw materials, development of separate collection of packaging waste, and promotion of market opportunities to encourage the use of materials obtained from recycled and recovered packaging;
c) reduction of the flow of packaging waste destined for final disposal through other forms of recovery;
d) application of prevention measures consisting of national programs or similar actions to be adopted after consulting the interested economic operators.
2. In order to ensure the accountability of economic operators in accordance with the "polluter pays" principle as well as their cooperation according to the principles of
---
"shared responsibility," the management of packaging waste is also inspired by the following principles:
a) identification of the obligations of each economic operator, ensuring that the cost of separate collection, valorization, and disposal of packaging waste is borne by producers and users in proportion to the quantities of packaging placed on the national market and that the public administration organizes the separate collection;
b) promotion of forms of cooperation between public and private entities;
c) information to users of packaging and in particular to consumers according to the provisions of Legislative Decree No. 195 of 19 August 2005, implementing Directive 2003/4/EC on public access to environmental information;
d) encouragement of the return of used packaging and the conferment of packaging waste in separate collection by the consumer.
3. The information referred to in letter c) of paragraph 2 concerns in particular:
a) the available return, collection, and recovery systems;
b) the role of packaging users and consumers in the process of reuse, recovery, and recycling of packaging and packaging waste;
c) the meaning of the marks affixed to packaging as they appear on the market;
d) the significant elements of the management programs for packaging and packaging waste, as referred to in Article 225, paragraph 1, and the significant elements of the specific provisions contained in the regional plans pursuant to Article 225, paragraph 6.
4. In accordance with the decisions taken by the Commission of the European Union, by decree of the Minister for the Environment and the Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, the necessary technical measures for the application of the provisions of this title are adopted, with particular reference to hazardous packaging, including domestic, as well as to primary packaging of medical equipment and pharmaceutical products, small packaging, and luxury packaging. Where health aspects are involved, the aforesaid decree is adopted in concert with the Minister of Health.
5. All packaging must be appropriately labeled according to the methods established by decree of the Minister for the Environment and the Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister for Production Activities in accordance with the decisions adopted by the Commission of the European Union, to facilitate the collection, reuse, recovery, and recycling of packaging, as well as to give correct information to consumers about the final destinations of the packaging. The aforesaid decree must also prescribe the obligation to indicate, for the purposes of identification and classification of the packaging by the interested industry, the nature of the packaging materials used, on the basis of Commission Decision 97/129/EC.

**Art. 220**
**Recovery and recycling objectives**
1. To comply with the principles of Article 219, producers and users must achieve the final recycling and recovery objectives for packaging waste in accordance with the community discipline indicated in Annex E to the fourth part of this decree.
2. To ensure control of the achievement of the recycling and recovery objectives, the National Packaging Consortium referred to in Article 224 shall annually communicate to the National Section of the Waste Cadastre, using the single declaration form as per art. 1 of Law No. 70 of 25 January 1994, the data, referring to the previous solar year, relating to the quantity of packaging for each material and for each type of packaging placed on the market, as well as, for each material, the quantity of reused packaging and recycled and recovered packaging waste from the national market. The aforesaid communications can be submitted by the subjects referred to in Article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), for those who have joined the management systems provided therein and sent simultaneously to the National Packaging Consortium. Packaging waste exported from the Community pursuant to Council Regulation (EEC) No. 259 of 1 February 1993, Council Regulation (EC) No. 1420 of 29 April 1999, and Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1547 of 12 July 1999, are taken into consideration for the purposes of fulfilling the obligations and achieving the objectives of paragraph 1, only if there is suitable documentary evidence proving that the recovery and/or recycling operation was carried out in ways equivalent to
---
those provided for in this regard by Community legislation. The Authority referred to in Article 207, within one hundred and twenty days of its establishment, shall draw up a list of non-EU countries where recovery and/or recycling operations are considered equivalent to those provided for in this regard by Community legislation, also taking into account any decisions and orientations of the European Union on the matter.
3. Public administrations and managers shall encourage, for environmental reasons or in consideration of the cost-benefit ratio, energy recovery where it is preferable to recycling, provided that it does not result in a significant deviation from the national recovery and recycling objectives.
4. Public administrations and managers shall encourage, where appropriate, the use of materials obtained from recycled packaging waste for the manufacture of packaging and other products by:
a) improving market conditions for such materials;
b) revising existing standards that prevent the use of such materials.
5. Without prejudice to what is established by Article 224, paragraph 3, letter e), should the overall objectives for recycling and recovery of packaging waste as set in paragraph 1 not be achieved by the foreseen deadline, by decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, after deliberation of the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Minister for Production Activities, economic measures shall be applied to the different types of packaging materials, proportionate to the failure to achieve individual objectives, the revenue of which is paid into the State budget to be reallocated by decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance to a specific chapter of the Ministry for the Environment and Protection of the Territory. These sums will be used to promote prevention, separate collection, recycling, and recovery of packaging waste.
6. The objectives referred to in paragraph 1 refer to packaging waste generated on the national territory, as well as to all recycling and recovery systems net of scraps and are adopted and updated in accordance with community legislation by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister for Production Activities.
7. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Minister for Production Activities shall notify the Commission of the European Union, pursuant to and according to the methods of articles 12, 16, and 17 of Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 1994, the report on the implementation of the provisions of this title accompanied by the data acquired pursuant to paragraph 2 and the projects of the measures that are intended to be adopted within the scope of the same title.
8. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Minister for Production Activities shall periodically provide the European Union and the other member States with data on packaging and packaging waste according to the tables and schemes adopted by the Commission of the European Union with Decision 2005/270/EC of 22 March 2005.

**Art. 221**
**Obligations of producers and users**
1. Producers and users are responsible for the correct and effective environmental management of packaging and packaging waste generated from the consumption of their own products.
2. Within the scope of the objectives referred to in Articles 205 and 220 and the Program referred to in Article 225, producers and users, upon request of the service operator and as provided for by the program agreement referred to in Article 224, paragraph 5, shall fulfill the obligation to take back primary packaging waste or waste otherwise conferred to the public service of the same nature and collected in a separate manner. To this end, to ensure the necessary connection with the separate collection activity organized by public administrations and for the other purposes indicated in Article 224, producers and users shall participate in the National Packaging Consortium, unless one of the systems referred to in paragraph 3, letters a) and c) of this article is adopted.
3. To fulfill the obligations of recycling and recovery as well as the obligations of taking back used packaging and collecting secondary and tertiary packaging waste on private surfaces, and with reference to the obligation of taking back, upon indication of the National Packaging Consortium referred to in Article 224, packaging waste conferred by the public service, producers may alternatively:
a) organize autonomously, also in an associated form, the management of their own packaging waste
---
on the entire national territory;
b) join one of the consortia referred to in Article 223;
c) certify under their own responsibility that a system for the return of their own packaging has been put in place, through suitable documentation demonstrating the self-sufficiency of the system, in compliance with the criteria and methods of paragraphs 5 and 6.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 3, users are required to deliver used secondary and tertiary packaging and secondary and tertiary packaging waste to a collection point organized by the producers and agreed upon with them. Users may, however, confer the said packaging and packaging waste to the public service within the limits deriving from the criteria determined pursuant to Article 195, paragraph 2, letter e). Until the adoption of the criteria referred to in Article 195, paragraph 2, letter e), the conferment of used secondary and tertiary packaging and secondary and tertiary packaging waste to the public service is permitted for private areas not exceeding 150 square meters in municipalities with a resident population of less than ten thousand inhabitants, or 250 square meters in municipalities with a resident population of more than ten thousand inhabitants.
5. Producers who do not join the National Packaging Consortium and a consortium under Article 223 must request from the Authority referred to in Article 207, upon providing suitable and exhaustive documentation, the recognition of the system adopted pursuant to paragraph 3, letters a) or c), within ninety days of assuming the status of producer pursuant to Article 218, paragraph 1, letter r) or from withdrawal from even just one of the aforementioned consortia; the withdrawal is effective twelve months after its communication. To this end, producers must demonstrate that they have organized the system according to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness, that the system is effectively and autonomously functioning, and that it is capable of achieving, within the scope of the activities carried out, the recovery and recycling objectives of Article 220. Producers must also ensure that users and end-users of packaging are informed about the methods of the adopted system. The Authority, after acquiring the necessary evaluation elements from the National Packaging Consortium, shall decide within ninety days of the request. In case of no response within the aforementioned term, the interested party shall ask the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory for the adoption of the relative substitute measures to be issued within the following sixty days. The Authority is required to present an annual summary report on all the investigations carried out. The recognitions already made under the previous legislation remain valid.
6. The producers referred to in paragraph 5 shall prepare and transmit to the National Packaging Consortium referred to in Article 224 their own Specific Prevention Program which constitutes the basis for the elaboration of the general program referred to in Article 225.
7. By September 30 of each year, the producers referred to in paragraph 5 shall present to the Authority provided for in Article 207 and to the National Packaging Consortium a specific prevention and management plan for the following solar year, which will be included in the general prevention and management program referred to in Article 225.
8. By May 31 of each year, the producers referred to in paragraph 5 are also required to present to the Authority provided for in Article 207 and to the National Packaging Consortium a report on the management for the previous solar year, including the nominal indication of the users who, up to consumption, participate in the system referred to in paragraph 3, letters a) or c), of the specific program and the results achieved in the recovery and recycling of packaging waste; the same report may highlight the problems inherent in achieving the institutional goals and any proposals for adapting the legislation.
9. The non-recognition of the system pursuant to paragraph 5, or the revocation ordered by the Authority, after notice to the interested party, if the results obtained are insufficient to achieve the objectives of Article 220 or if the obligations provided for in paragraphs 6 and 7 have been violated, entails for the producers the obligation to participate in one of the consortia referred to in Article 223 and, together with their users at every level up to consumption, in the consortium provided for in Article 224. The Authority's provisions are communicated to the interested producers and to the National Packaging Consortium. The mandatory adhesion to the consortia arranged in application of this paragraph has retroactive effect only for the purposes of paying the environmental contribution provided for by Article 224, paragraph 3, letter h), and the related default interest. To producers and users who, within ninety days of receiving the Authority's communication, do not proceed to join the consortia and pay the sums due to them, the sanctions provided for also apply.
---
by Article 261.
10. The costs are borne by the producers and users for:
a) the take-back of used packaging and the collection of secondary and tertiary packaging waste;
b) the additional charges related to the separate collection of packaging waste conferred to the public service for which the Area Authority requests the National Packaging Consortium or, on its behalf, the subjects referred to in paragraph 3 to proceed with the take-back;
c) the reuse of used packaging;
d) the recycling and recovery of packaging waste;
e) the disposal of secondary and tertiary packaging waste.
11. The return of used packaging or packaging waste, including the conferment of waste in separate collection, must not entail economic charges for the consumer.

**Art. 222**
**Separate collection and obligations of the public administration**
1. The public administration must organize adequate separate collection systems to allow the consumer to confer selected packaging waste from domestic waste and other types of packaging waste to the public service. In particular:
a) homogeneous coverage of the territory in each optimal territorial area must be guaranteed, taking into account the geographical context;
b) the management of separate collection must be carried out according to criteria that prioritize the efficiency, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness of the service, as well as coordination with the management of other waste.
2. In the event that the Authority referred to in Article 207 ascertains that public administrations have not activated adequate separate collection systems for packaging waste, also for the achievement of the objectives of Article 205, and in particular those of recovery and recycling of Article 220, it may request the National Packaging Consortium to replace the operators of the separate collection services, also by using public or private subjects identified by the National Packaging Consortium itself through transparent and selective procedures, on a temporary and urgent basis, however for a period not exceeding twenty-four months, provided that this occurs within optimally identified areas, for the organization and/or integration of the service deemed insufficient. If the National Packaging Consortium, to achieve the recovery and recycling objectives provided for by Article 220, decides to adhere to the request, the value of the tariff applied for the collection of the corresponding urban waste will be paid to it, net of the revenues from the sale of the materials and the fee due for the take-back of the packaging waste and of the homogeneous commodity fractions. If the National Packaging Consortium does not declare its acceptance within fifteen days of the request, the Authority, in the following fifteen days, identifies, through transparent and selective procedures, a subject of proven and documented reliability and capacity to whom to entrust the separate collection and confer the packaging waste on a temporary and urgent basis, until the completion of the ordinary procedures for the awarding of the service and in any case for a period not exceeding twelve months, extendable by a further twelve months in case of objective and documented impossibility of awarding.
3. Public administrations shall encourage, where appropriate, the use of materials from recycled packaging waste for the manufacture of packaging and other products.
4. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Minister for Production Activities shall oversee the publication of the measures and objectives subject to the information campaigns referred to in Article 224, paragraph 3, letter g).
5. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, shall oversee the publication of the national standards that transpose the harmonized standards referred to in Article 226, paragraph 3, and shall communicate them to the Commission of the European Union.

**Art. 223**
**Consortia**
1. In order to rationalize and organize the return of used packaging, the collection of
---
secondary and tertiary packaging waste on private surfaces and the take-back, upon indication of the National Packaging Consortium referred to in Article 224, of packaging waste conferred to the public service, as well as the recycling and recovery of packaging waste according to criteria of effectiveness, efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and transparency, producers who do not act pursuant to Article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), shall establish one or more consortia for each packaging material operating throughout the national territory. Recoverers and recyclers who do not fall into the category of producers may participate in the consortia referred to in this paragraph, by agreement with the other members and jointly with them.
2. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 have the legal personality of a private non-profit entity and are governed by a statute adopted in accordance with a model statute, drawn up by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, to be published in the Official Gazette within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, in accordance with the principles of this decree and, in particular, with those of efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, and transparency, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The statute adopted by each consortium is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it within the following ninety days, with a provision adopted in concert with the Minister for Production Activities. If the Minister deems it not to approve the transmitted statute, for reasons of legitimacy or merit, he shall return it to the requesting consortium with his observations. Consortia already recognized under the previous legislation are required to adapt their statute in accordance with the new model statute within one hundred and twenty days of its publication in the Official Gazette. The ministerial decree approving the consortia's statute is published in the Official Gazette.
3. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 are required to ensure the balance of their financial management. To this end, the financial means for the functioning of the aforesaid consortia derive from the contributions of the members and from the payments made by the National Packaging Consortium pursuant to Article 224, paragraph 3, letter h), according to the methods indicated in Article 224, paragraph 8, from the proceeds of the sale, in compliance with the principles of competition and correct environmental management, of the returned, collected or taken-back packaging and packaging waste, as well as from any other proceeds and contributions from members or third parties.
4. Each consortium shall develop and transmit to the National Packaging Consortium and to the Authority referred to in Article 207 its own Specific Prevention Program which constitutes the basis for the elaboration of the general program referred to in Article 225.
5. By September 30 of each year, the consortia referred to in this article shall submit to the Authority provided for in Article 207 and to the National Packaging Consortium a specific prevention and management plan for the following solar year, which will be included in the general prevention and management program.
6. By May 31 of each year, the consortia referred to in this article are also required to submit to the Authority referred to in Article 207 and to the National Packaging Consortium a report on the management for the previous year, with the nominal indication of the members, the specific program, and the results achieved in the recovery and recycling of packaging waste.

**Art. 224**
**National Packaging Consortium**
1. For the achievement of the global objectives of recovery and recycling and to ensure the necessary coordination of separate collection activities, producers and users, in compliance with the provisions of Article 221, paragraph 2, shall participate on an equal basis in the National Packaging Consortium, hereinafter referred to as CONAI, which has the legal personality of a private non-profit entity and is governed by a statute approved by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister for Production Activities.
2. Within twenty-four months* from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, CONAI shall adapt its statute to the principles contained in this decree and in particular to those of transparency, effectiveness, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness, as well as free competition in the sector's activities, pursuant to Article 221, paragraph 2. The adopted statute is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the
---
territory, who approves it in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, subject to reasoned observations to which CONAI is required to adapt in the following sixty days. Should CONAI not comply within the prescribed terms, the amendments to the statute are made by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities.
3. CONAI performs the following functions:
a) defines, in agreement with the regions and the interested public administrations, the territorial areas in which to operate an integrated system that includes the collection, selection, and transport of selected materials to collection or sorting centers;
b) defines, with the public administrations belonging to the individual integrated systems referred to in letter a), the general conditions for the take-back by producers of selected waste from separate collection;
c) prepares and updates, on the basis of the specific prevention programs referred to in articles 221, paragraph 6, and 223, paragraph 4, the General Program for the prevention and management of packaging and packaging waste referred to in article 225;
d) promotes program agreements with economic operators to encourage the recycling and recovery of packaging waste and ensures their implementation;
e) ensures the necessary cooperation between the consortia referred to in article 223, the subjects referred to in article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), and other economic operators, including by allocating a portion of the CONAI environmental contribution, referred to in letter h), to consortia that achieve recovery or recycling percentages higher than the minimums indicated in the General Program, for the purpose of achieving the global objectives of Annex E to the fourth part of this decree. To the same extent, the share of the contribution due to consortia that do not reach the individual recovery objectives is reduced;
f) ensures the necessary coordination between public administrations, consortia, and other economic operators;
g) organizes, in agreement with public administrations, the information campaigns deemed useful for the implementation of the General Program;
h) distributes among producers and users the additional costs for separate collection as per article 221, paragraph 10, letter b), as well as the costs for recycling and for the recovery of packaging waste conferred to the separate collection service, in proportion to the total quantity, weight, and type of packaging material placed on the national market, net of the quantities of used packaging reused in the previous year for each type of material. To this end, it determines and places on the members, with the methods identified by the statute, also based on the uses and criteria of paragraph 8, the contribution called the CONAI environmental contribution;
i) promotes coordination with the management of other waste as provided for in article 222, paragraph 1, letter b), also defining its areas of application;
l) promotes the conclusion, on a voluntary basis, of agreements between the consortia referred to in article 223 and the subjects referred to in article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), with public and private subjects. Such agreements relate to the environmental management of the same type of material subject to the intervention of the consortia with regard to packaging, excluding in any case the use of the CONAI environmental contribution;
m) provides the data and information requested by the Authority referred to in article 207 and ensures compliance with the guidelines traced by it.
4. For the achievement of the multiannual objectives of recovery and recycling, any management surpluses set aside by CONAI and by the consortia referred to in article 223 in the reserves constituting their net assets do not contribute to the formation of income, provided that the prohibition of distribution, in any form, to the members and adherents of such surpluses and reserves is respected, even in the event of dissolution of the aforesaid management systems, consortia, and CONAI.
5. CONAI may stipulate a framework program agreement on a national basis with the National Association of Italian Municipalities (ANCI), with the Union of Italian Provinces (UPI), or with the Area Authorities in order to guarantee the implementation of the principle of shared management responsibility between producers, users, and public administrations. In particular, this agreement establishes:
a) the amount of the additional costs for the separate collection of packaging waste, referred to in article 221, paragraph 10, letter b), to be paid to the competent public
---
administrations, determined according to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and transparency of management of the same service, as well as on the basis of the tariff referred to in Article 238, from the date of its entry into force;
b) the obligations and sanctions imposed on the contracting parties;
c) the methods of collection of packaging waste in relation to the needs of recycling and recovery activities.
6. The program agreement referred to in paragraph 5 is transmitted to the Authority referred to in Article 207, which may request any modifications and integrations within the following sixty days.
7. For the purposes of allocating the costs referred to in paragraph 3, letter h), reusable packaging placed on the market upon deposit is excluded from the calculation.
8. The CONAI environmental contribution is used as a priority for the take-back of primary packaging or packaging otherwise conferred to the public service and is attributed by CONAI, on the basis of specific agreements, to the subjects referred to in Article 223 in direct proportion to the quantity and quality of recovered or recycled packaging waste and taking into account the quantity and type of packaging placed on the national market. For the further use of the contribution, CONAI stipulates, with the subjects referred to in Article 223, agreements for the organization of systems for collection, recovery, and recycling of secondary and tertiary packaging waste. CONAI and the subjects referred to in Article 223 are obliged to adopt a specific accounting system that distinguishes the share of the CONAI environmental contribution used for the take-back, recycling, and recovery of primary packaging, or otherwise conferred to the public service, from that used for secondary and tertiary packaging taken back, recycled, or recovered from private surfaces. CONAI provides the necessary financial means for the performance of its functions with the proceeds of its activities, with the contributions of the members, and with a share of the CONAI environmental contribution, determined to the extent necessary to meet the expenses deriving from the performance, in compliance with the criteria of cost containment and management efficiency, of the functions conferred upon it by this title.
9. The application of the CONAI environmental contribution excludes the subjection of the same good and the raw materials that constitute it to other contributions with environmental purposes provided for by the fourth part of this decree or in any case established in application of this decree.
10. A representative of consumers appointed by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and by the Minister of Production Activities participates with voting rights in the CONAI board of directors.
11. The administrators to whom operational delegations are attributed and the holders of management positions of the organizations referred to in Articles 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), and 223 may not participate in the CONAI board of directors.
12. In the event of non-stipulation of the agreements referred to in paragraphs 3 and 5, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, may determine by his own decree the amount of the additional costs for the separate collection of packaging waste, referred to in Article 221, paragraph 10, letter b), to be borne by producers and users, as well as the conditions and methods of take-back of the same waste by the producers. If such agreements are concluded by CONAI and one or more of the subjects referred to in Article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), or one or more consortia referred to in Article 223 do not adhere to them or do not conclude with the competent public administrations, which request it, the local agreements for the take-back of packaging waste under the conditions established by the agreement concluded with CONAI, CONAI itself may substitute such subjects in the conclusion of local agreements, if necessary to achieve the recovery and recycling objectives provided for by Article 220.
13. In the event that the final recycling and recovery objectives for packaging waste indicated in the general prevention and management program for packaging as per Article 225 are exceeded at a national level, CONAI shall adopt, within its financial resources, special forms of incentive for the take-back of packaging waste in geographical areas that have not yet reached the separate collection objectives of Article 205, paragraph 1, within the maximum recycling limits provided for in Annex E to the fourth part of this decree.
*Note: the original term of one hundred and eighty days was first extended to 12 months from the entry into force of this legislative decree by art. 1, c. 6 of the Decree
---
Legislative Decree No. 284 of 8 November 2006 (G.U. No. 274 of 24/11/2006); it was then further extended, by effect of art. 5 of D.L. No. 300 of 28 December 2006 - so-called "Milleproroghe Decree" (G.U. No. 300 of 28/12/2006), as amended during conversion into Law No. 17/2007 (G.U. No. 47 of 26.2.2007, S.O. No. 48).

**Art. 225**
**General program for the prevention and management of packaging and packaging waste**
1. On the basis of the specific prevention programs referred to in Articles 221, paragraph 6, and 223, paragraph 4, CONAI annually prepares a General Program for the prevention and management of packaging and packaging waste which identifies, with reference to the individual types of packaging material, the measures to achieve the following objectives:
a) prevention of the formation of packaging waste;
b) increase in the proportion of the quantity of recyclable packaging waste with respect to the quantity of non-recyclable packaging;
c) increase in the proportion of the quantity of reusable packaging waste with respect to the quantity of non-reusable packaging;
d) improvement of the characteristics of the packaging in order to allow it to withstand more journeys or rotations under normally foreseeable conditions of use;
e) achievement of recovery and recycling objectives.
2. The General Prevention Program also determines:
a) the percentage by weight of each type of packaging waste to be recovered every five years and, within this global objective, on the basis of the same deadline, the percentage by weight to be recycled of the individual types of packaging materials, with a minimum percentage by weight for each material;
b) the intermediate recovery and recycling objectives with respect to the objectives referred to in letter a).
3. By November 30 of each year, CONAI transmits to the Authority referred to in Article 207 a specific prevention and management plan for the following solar year, which will be included in the general prevention and management program.
4. The general final report for the previous solar year is transmitted for an opinion to the Authority referred to in Article 207, by June 30 of each year. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the Minister for Production Activities, in agreement with the Permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano and ANCI, the approval and any modifications and integrations of the General Program for the prevention and management of packaging and packaging waste are provided for.
5. In the event that the General Program is not prepared, the same is drawn up in a substitute capacity by the Authority referred to in Article 207. In this case, the recovery and recycling objectives are the maximum ones provided for in Annex E to the fourth part of this decree.
6. The regional plans referred to in Article 199 are integrated with specific provisions for the management of packaging and packaging waste on the basis of the program referred to in this article.

**Art. 226**
**Prohibitions**
1. The disposal in landfills of recovered packaging and containers is prohibited, with the exception of waste resulting from selection, recycling, and recovery operations of packaging waste.
2. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 221, paragraph 4, it is forbidden to place tertiary packaging of any nature into the normal collection circuit for urban waste. Any secondary packaging not returned to the user by the retail merchant may be conferred to the public service only in separate collection, where this has been activated within the limits provided for by Article 221, paragraph 4.
3. Only packaging that meets the European standards set by the European Committee for Standardization in accordance with the essential requirements established by art. 9 of Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 1994 may be marketed. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, the aforesaid standards are updated, taking into account the communication of the European Commission 2005/C44/13. Until
---
the issuance of the aforesaid decree, Annex F to the fourth part of this decree shall apply.
4. It is forbidden to place on the market packaging or packaging components, with the exception of packaging made entirely of crystal glass, with total concentration levels of lead, mercury, cadmium, and hexavalent chromium exceeding 100 parts per million (ppm) by weight. For glass packaging, Decision 2001/171/EC of 19 February 2001 applies, and for plastic packaging, Decision 1999/177/EC of 8 February 1999 applies.
5. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, the following are determined, in accordance with the decisions of the European Union:
a) the conditions under which the concentration levels referred to in paragraph 4 do not apply to recycled materials and to production circuits localized in a closed and controlled chain;
b) the types of packaging exempt from the requirement of paragraph 4.

**TITLE III - MANAGEMENT OF PARTICULAR CATEGORIES OF WASTE**

**Art. 227**
**Electrical and electronic waste, sanitary waste, end-of-life vehicles and products containing asbestos**
1. The special, national, and community provisions relating to other types of waste remain in force, and in particular those concerning:
a) electrical and electronic waste: Directive 2000/53/EC, Directive 2002/95/EC, and Directive 2003/108/EC and related implementing Legislative Decree No. 151 of 25 July 2005. Relative to the date of entry into force of the individual provisions of the said measure, pending the entry into force of these provisions, the discipline of art. 44 of Legislative Decree No. 22 of 5 February 1997 continues to apply.
b) sanitary waste: Decree of the President of the Republic No. 254 of 15 July 2003;
c) end-of-life vehicles: Directive 2000/53/EC and Legislative Decree No. 209 of 24 June 2003, without prejudice to the distribution of charges, to be borne by economic operators, for the take-back and treatment of end-of-life vehicles in accordance with the provisions of art. 5, paragraph 4, of the said Directive 2000/53/EC;

**Art. 228**
**End-of-life tires**
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Legislative Decree No. 209 of 24 June 2003, as well as the provisions of Articles 179 and 180 of this decree, in order to optimize the recovery of end-of-life tires and to reduce their generation also through reconstruction, tire producers and importers are obliged to provide, individually or in an associated form and with at least annual periodicity, for the management of quantities of end-of-life tires equal to those they have placed on the market and destined for sale on the national territory.
2. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in agreement with the Permanent Conference for relations between the State, the regions, and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, to be issued within one hundred and twenty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the times and methods for implementing the obligation of paragraph 1 are regulated. In all phases of tire marketing, the contribution to be borne by end-users necessary, also in relation to the different types of tires, to meet the costs deriving from the obligation of paragraph 1, must be indicated on the invoice.
3. The transfer to the eventual associated operational structure, by the producers and importers of tires who are part of it, of the sums corresponding to the contribution for recovery, calculated on the quantity of tires placed on the market in the previous year, constitutes fulfillment of the obligation of paragraph 1 with exemption of the producer or importer from any related liability.
4. Producers and importers of tires who fail to comply with the obligations of paragraph 1 are subject to a pecuniary administrative sanction proportional to the gravity of the non-compliance, in any case not exceeding double the contribution collected for the period considered.
---
**Art. 229**
**Waste-derived fuel and high-quality waste-derived fuel - CDR and CDR-Q**
1. For the purposes and effects of the fourth part of this decree, waste-derived fuel (CDR), hereinafter CDR, as defined by Article 183, paragraph 1, letter r), is classified as special waste.
2. Without prejudice to the application of the discipline of this article, high-quality waste-derived fuel (CDR-Q), hereinafter CDR-Q, as defined by Article 183, paragraph 1, letter s), produced within a production process that adopts a quality management system based on the UNI-EN ISO 9001 standard and intended for effective use in co-combustion, as defined by Article 2, paragraph 1, letter g), of the decree of the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Crafts of 11 November 1999, published in the Official Gazette no. 292 of 14 December 1999, in electricity production plants and in cement plants, as specified in the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 March 2002, published in the Official Gazette no. 60 of 12 March 2002, is excluded from the scope of application of the fourth part of this decree. The Government is authorized to make the consequent amendments to the said decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 March 2002.
3. The production of CDR and CDR-Q must take place in compliance with the hierarchy of waste treatment and remains in any case subject to the issuance of authorizations for the construction and operation of the plant provided for by the fourth part of this decree. In the production of CDR and CDR-Q, the use of non-hazardous special waste is permitted for a maximum percentage of fifty percent by weight. For the production and use of CDR, recourse to the simplified procedures of Articles 214 and 216 is permitted.
4. For the purposes of the construction and operation of incineration or co-incineration plants that use CDR, the specific community and national provisions on integrated environmental authorization and waste incineration apply. For the construction and operation of electricity production plants and cement plants that use CDR-Q, the specific sector regulations apply. The methods for the use of CDR-Q are defined by the said decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 March 2002.
5. CDR-Q is a renewable source, pursuant to art. 2, paragraph 1, letter a), of Legislative Decree No. 387 of 29 December 2003, in proportion to the biodegradable fraction contained therein.
[6. CDR and CDR-Q benefit from the incentive scheme referred to in art. 17, paragraph 1, of Legislative Decree No. 387 of 29 December 2003].(*)
(*) Note: Paragraph repealed by art. 1, paragraph 1120 of the 2007 Finance Law (Law No. 296 of 27 December 2006, published in GU No. 299 of 27.12.2006 - S. O. n.244)

**Art. 230**
**Waste deriving from infrastructure maintenance activities**
1. The place of production of waste deriving from maintenance activities on infrastructures, carried out directly by the operator of the network infrastructure and of the plants for the provision of supplies and services of public interest or through third parties, may coincide with the headquarters of the site that manages the maintenance activity or with the local headquarters of the infrastructure operator in whose competence the section of infrastructure affected by the maintenance works falls, or with the place of concentration where the material removed from the works is transported for subsequent technical evaluation, aimed at identifying the material that is actually, directly, and objectively reusable, without being subjected to any treatment.
2. The technical evaluation of the infrastructure operator referred to in paragraph 1 is carried out no later than sixty days from the date of completion of the works. The documentation relating to the technical evaluation is kept, together with the loading and unloading registers, for five years.
3. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 also apply to waste deriving from maintenance activities, carried out directly by operators providing public service or through third parties, of the means and plants that use the infrastructures referred to in paragraph 1.
---
4. Without prejudice to the provisions of article 190, paragraph 3, the loading and unloading registers relating to waste produced by the subjects and from the activities referred to in this article may be kept at the place of production of the waste as defined in paragraph 1.
5. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities, Health, and Infrastructure, the management methods for waste from sewer cleaning activities are defined, based on the criterion according to which such waste is considered produced at the headquarters or domicile of the subject carrying out the cleaning activity.

**Art. 231**
**End-of-life vehicles not regulated by Legislative Decree no. 209 of 24 June 2003**
1. The owner of a motor vehicle or a trailer, excluding those regulated by Legislative Decree no. 209 of 24 June 2002, who intends to proceed with its demolition must deliver it to a collection center for securing, demolition, recovery of materials, and scrapping, authorized pursuant to articles 208, 209, and 210. Such collection centers may also receive waste consisting of parts of motor vehicles.
2. The owner of a motor vehicle or a trailer as per paragraph 1 intended for demolition may also deliver it to the dealerships or branches of the manufacturing houses for subsequent delivery to the centers as per paragraph 1, if they intend to trade in the said vehicle or trailer to purchase another one.
3. Motor vehicles or trailers as per paragraph 1 found by public bodies or not claimed by their owners and those acquired by occupation pursuant to articles 927, 928, 929, and 923 of the civil code are delivered to the collection centers as per paragraph 1 in the cases and with the procedures determined by decree of the Minister of the Interior, in concert with the Ministers of Economy and Finance, Environment and Protection of the Territory, and Infrastructure and Transport. Until the adoption of such decree, the decree of 22 October 1999, no. 460, shall apply.
4. The collection centers or the dealerships or branches of the manufacturing houses shall issue to the owner of the vehicle or trailer delivered for demolition a certificate from which must result the date of delivery, the details of the center's authorization, the owner's personal details, and the vehicle's identification details, as well as the assumption, by the manager of the center itself or by the dealership or the owner of the branch, of the commitment to directly handle the procedures for cancellation from the Public Automobile Register (PRA).
5. The cancellation from the PRA of vehicles and trailers sent for demolition occurs exclusively under the care of the owner of the collection center or the dealership or the owner of the branch without agency fees charged to the owner of the vehicle or trailer. To this end, within ninety days of the delivery of the vehicle or trailer by the owner, the manager of the collection center, the dealership, or the owner of the branch must communicate the delivery for demolition of the vehicle and deliver the certificate of ownership, the registration card, and the license plates to the competent PRA office which proceeds pursuant to and for the effects of art. 103, paragraph 1, of legislative decree no. 285 of 30 April 1992.
6. Possession of the certificate referred to in paragraph 4 frees the owner of the vehicle from civil, criminal, and administrative liability connected with the ownership of the same.
7. The managers of the collection centers, the dealerships, and the owners of the branches of the manufacturing houses as per paragraphs 1 and 2 cannot alienate, dismantle, or destroy motor vehicles and trailers to be sent for dismantling and subsequent reduction into scrap without first having fulfilled the tasks as per paragraph 5.
8. The details of the receipt of the report and delivery of the license plates and documents to the competent offices must be noted in the special register of entry and exit of vehicles to be kept according to the rules of the regulation of legislative decree no. 285 of 30 April 1992.
9. The same obligations as in paragraphs 7 and 8 are subject to the managers of collection centers or other places of custody of vehicles removed pursuant to art. 159 of legislative decree no. 285 of 30 April 1992, in the case of demolition of the vehicle pursuant to art. 215, paragraph 4 of the aforesaid legislative decree no. 285 of 30 April 1992.
10. The trade of spare parts recovered from the demolition of motor vehicles or trailers is permitted, with the exclusion of those related to the
---
safety of vehicles. The origin of the spare parts put on sale must result from the invoices and receipts issued to the customer.
11. The spare parts related to the safety of vehicles are sold only to businesses engaged in auto repair as per Law No. 122 of 5 February 1992, and, to be used, each auto repair company is required to certify their suitability and functionality.
12. The use of spare parts as per paragraphs 10 and 11 by companies engaged in auto repair activities must result from the invoices issued to the customer.
13. Within six months from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities and of Infrastructure and Transport, shall issue the technical standards relating to the characteristics of the demolition plants, the securing operations, and the identification of spare parts related to safety as per paragraph 11. Until the adoption of such decree, the requirements relating to the collection centers and the methods of treatment of vehicles as per Annex I of legislative decree no. 209 of 24 June 2003 shall apply.

**Art. 232**
**Waste produced by ships and cargo residues**
1. The national discipline relating to waste produced by ships and cargo residues is contained in legislative decree no. 182 of 24 June 2003.
2. Plants that receive bilge water already subjected to preliminary treatment in plants authorized under current legislation may access the simplified procedures of decree no. 269 of 17 November 2005, provided that the raw materials and the products obtained have the characteristics indicated at point 6.6.4 of Annex 3 of the aforesaid decree, as amended by paragraph 3 of this article.
3. At points 2.4 of Annex 1 and 6.6.4 of Annex 3 of decree no. 269 of 17 November 2005, the conjunction: "and" is replaced by the disjunction: "or".

**Art. 233**
**National consortia for the collection and treatment of used vegetable and animal oils and fats**
1. In order to rationalize and organize the management of used vegetable and animal oils and fats, all operators in the supply chain shall form one or more consortia. The management systems adopted must comply with the principles of Article 237.
2. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 have the legal personality of a private non-profit entity and are governed by a statute adopted in accordance with a model statute drawn up by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, to be published in the Official Gazette within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, in accordance with the principles of this decree and, in particular, with those of efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and transparency, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The statute adopted by each consortium is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it in the following ninety days, with his provision adopted in concert with the Minister of Production Activities. If the Minister deems it not to approve the transmitted statute, for reasons of legitimacy or merit, he shall return it to the requesting consortium with the relative observations. Consortia already recognized under the previous legislation are required to adapt their statute in accordance with the new model statute within one hundred and twenty days of its publication in the Official Gazette. The ministerial decree of approval of the consortia's statute is published in the Official Gazette.
3. The consortia shall carry out the following tasks throughout the national territory:
a) ensure the collection from the subjects referred to in paragraph 12, transport, storage, treatment, and recovery of used vegetable and animal oils and fats;
b) ensure, in compliance with the provisions in force on pollution, the disposal of collected used vegetable and animal oils and fats for which regeneration is not possible or convenient;
c) promote the conduct of market surveys and sector studies in order to improve, economically and technically, the cycle of collection, transport, storage, treatment, and recovery of used vegetable and animal oils and fats.
---
4. The resolutions of the consortium bodies, adopted in relation to the purposes of the fourth part of this decree and in accordance with the statute, are binding on all participating companies.
5. The following participate in the consortia:
a) companies that produce, import, or hold used vegetable and animal oils and fats;
b) companies that recycle and recover used vegetable and animal oils and fats;
c) companies that carry out the collection, transport, and storage of used vegetable and animal oils and fats;
d) eventually, companies that have paid recycling contributions pursuant to paragraph 10, letter d).
6. The participation quotas in the consortia are determined based on the ratio between the production capacity of each member and the total production capacity developed by all members belonging to the same category.
7. The determination and assignment of quotas is the responsibility of the board of directors of the consortia, which provides for it annually according to the provisions of the statute.
8. In case of incapacity or impossibility to fulfill, through the same member companies, the obligations of collection, transport, storage, treatment, and reuse of used vegetable and animal oils and fats established by the fourth part of this decree, the consortium may, within the limits and in the ways determined by the statute, stipulate contracts with public and private companies for the fulfillment of the same obligations.
9. Operators who do not proceed pursuant to paragraph 1 may, within one hundred and twenty days from the publication in the Official Gazette of the model Statute pursuant to paragraph 2, organize autonomously, also in an associated form, the management of used vegetable and animal oils and fats throughout the national territory. In such a case, the operators themselves must request from the Authority referred to in Article 207, upon transmission of suitable documentation, the recognition of the system adopted. To this end, the aforesaid operators must demonstrate that they have organized the system according to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness, that the system is effectively and autonomously functioning, and that it is capable of achieving, within the scope of the activities carried out, the objectives set by this article. The operators must also ensure that users and end-users are informed about the methods of the system adopted. The Authority, after acquiring the necessary evaluation elements, shall decide within ninety days of the request. In case of no response within the above-indicated term, the interested party requests the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory to adopt the relative substitute measures to be issued within the following sixty days. The Authority is required to present an annual summary report on all the investigations carried out.
10. The consortia are required to ensure the balance of their own financial management. The financial resources of the consortia consist of:
a) the proceeds of the activities carried out by the consortia;
b) the asset management of the consortium fund;
c) the consortium quotas;
d) any recycling contributions borne by producers and importers of vegetable and animal oils and fats for food use intended for the domestic market and falling within the consortium's purposes as per paragraph 1, determined annually by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, in order to guarantee the management balance of the consortia.
11. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 and the subjects of paragraph 9 shall annually transmit to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and to the Minister of Production Activities the preliminary and final budgets within sixty days of their approval; moreover, by May 31 of each year, these subjects shall present to the same Ministers a technical report on the overall activity developed by them and by their individual members in the previous solar year.
12. Ninety days after the date of publication in the Official Gazette of the decree approving the Statute as per paragraph 2, anyone who, by reason of their professional activity, holds used vegetable and animal oils and fats is obliged to confer them to the consortia directly or by delivery to subjects appointed by the consortia, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 9. The obligation of conferment does not exclude the holder's right to cede used vegetable and animal oils and fats to companies of another State
---
member of the European Community.
13. Anyone who, by reason of their professional activity and pending conferment to the consortia, holds used animal and vegetable oils and fats is obliged to store them in a suitable container compliant with the provisions in force on disposal.
14. The community and national provisions in force regarding products, by-products, and waste of animal origin remain unaffected.
15. Legal entities belonging to the categories referred to in paragraph 5 that are established or in any case begin one of the activities proper to the same categories after the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree shall join one of the consortia referred to in paragraph 1 or adopt the system referred to in paragraph 9, within sixty days from the date of establishment or the start of their own activity. It is also permitted for the subjects referred to in paragraph 5, who are members of one of the consortia referred to in paragraph 1, to establish new consortia or adopt the system referred to in the same paragraph 9, after the term referred to in paragraph 9, after at least two years from the date of adhesion to the previous consortium and without prejudice to the obligation to pay the contributions accrued during the period.

**Art. 234**
**National consortia for the recycling of waste from polyethylene goods**
1. In order to rationalize, organize, and manage the collection and treatment of waste from polyethylene goods destined for disposal, one or more consortia are established for the recycling of waste from polyethylene goods, excluding packaging as per Article 218, paragraph 1, letters a), b), c), d), e) and dd), goods, and related waste, as per Articles 227, paragraph 1, letters a), b) and c), and 231, as well as, insofar as they are considered durable goods, materials and pipes in polyethylene intended for construction, sewerage, and the transport of gas and water. The management systems adopted must comply with the principles of Article 237.
2. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, to be issued within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the types of polyethylene goods referred to in paragraph 1 are identified.
3. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 have the legal personality of a private non-profit entity and are governed by a statute adopted in accordance with a model statute drawn up by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, to be published in the Official Gazette within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, in accordance with the principles of this decree and, in particular, those of efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, and transparency, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The statute adopted by each consortium is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it in the following ninety days, with his provision adopted in concert with the Minister of Production Activities. If the Minister deems it not to approve the transmitted statute, for reasons of legitimacy or merit, he shall return it to the requesting consortium with the relative observations. Consortia already recognized under the previous legislation are required to adapt their statute in accordance with the new model statute within one hundred and twenty days of its publication in the Official Gazette. The ministerial decree of approval of the consortia's statute is published in the Official Gazette.
4. The following participate in the consortia:
a) producers and importers of polyethylene goods;
b) users and distributors of polyethylene goods;
c) recyclers and recoverers of waste from polyethylene goods.
5. Producers and importers of polyethylene raw materials for the production of polyethylene goods and companies that carry out the collection, transport, and storage of polyethylene goods may participate in the consortia as associate members. The methods of participation are defined within the statute referred to in paragraph 3.
6. Legal entities belonging to the categories referred to in paragraph 4 that are established or in any case begin one of the activities proper to the same categories after the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree shall join one of the consortia referred to in paragraph 1 or adopt the system referred to in paragraph 7, within sixty days from the date of establishment or the start of their own activity. It is also permitted for the subjects referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5, who are members of one of the consortia referred to in paragraph 1, the
---
establishment, subsequent to the term of paragraph 7, of new consortia or the adoption of the system of the same paragraph 7, after at least a biennium from the date of adhesion to the previous consortium and without prejudice to the obligation to pay the contributions accrued during the period.
7. Operators who do not provide for under paragraph 1 may within one hundred and twenty days from the publication in the Official Gazette of the model Statute pursuant to paragraph 2:
a) organize autonomously, also in an associated form, the management of waste from polyethylene goods throughout the national territory;
b) implement a system for the return of polyethylene goods at the end of their life cycle to send them for recycling and recovery activities.
In the aforementioned cases, the operators themselves must request from the Authority referred to in Article 207, upon transmission of suitable documentation, the recognition of the system adopted. To this end, the aforementioned operators must demonstrate that they have organized the system according to criteria of efficiency, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness, that the system is effectively and autonomously functioning, and that it is capable of achieving, within the scope of the activities carried out, the objectives set by this article. The operators must also ensure that users and end-users are informed about the methods of the system adopted. The Authority, after acquiring the necessary evaluation elements, shall decide within ninety days of the request. In case of no response within the above-indicated term, the interested party asks the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory to adopt the relative substitute measures to be issued within the following sixty days. The Authority presents an annual summary report on all the investigations conducted.
8. The consortia of paragraph 1 have as their primary objective to favor the take-back of polyethylene-based goods at the end of their life cycle to send them for recycling and recovery activities. To this end, the consortia carry out the following tasks throughout the national territory:
a) they promote the management of the flow of polyethylene-based goods;
b) they ensure the collection, recycling, and other forms of recovery of waste from polyethylene goods;
c) they promote the valorization of non-reusable polyethylene fractions;
d) they promote user information, aimed at reducing the consumption of materials and favoring correct forms of collection and disposal;
e) they ensure the elimination of waste from polyethylene goods in cases where recycling is not possible or economically convenient, in compliance with anti-pollution provisions.
9. In the distribution of the members' products, the consortia may resort to forms of security deposit.
10. The consortia are required to guarantee the balance of their own financial management. The financial means for the functioning of the consortia are constituted by:
a) the proceeds from the activities carried out by the consortia;
b) the contributions of the participating subjects;
c) the asset management of the consortium fund;
d) the possible percentage recycling contribution as per paragraph 13.
11. The deliberations of the consortia's bodies, adopted in relation to the purposes of the fourth part of this decree and according to the statute, are binding on all participating subjects.
12. The consortia of paragraph 1 and the subjects of paragraph 7 shall annually transmit to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and to the Minister of Production Activities the preliminary and final budget within sixty days of their approval. The consortia of paragraph 1 and the subjects of paragraph 7, by May 31 of each year, shall present a technical report on the overall activity developed by themselves and by their individual members in the preceding solar year.
13. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities shall determine every two years with his own decree the minimum recycling objectives and, in case of failure to achieve the aforementioned objectives, may establish a percentage recycling contribution to be applied to the net amount of invoices issued by the producing and importing companies of polyethylene goods for the domestic market. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities shall determine the recycling objectives valid for the first two-year period within ninety days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree.
14. Ninety days after the publication in the official gazette of the decree approving the statute referred to in paragraph 3, anyone who, by reason of their activity, holds waste from polyethylene goods is obliged to deliver it to one of the recognized consortia, either directly or by delivery to subjects appointed by the consortia themselves, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 7. The obligation to deliver does not exclude the right for the holder to sell the waste from polyethylene goods to companies of another Member State of the European Community.

**Art. 235**
**National consortia for the collection and treatment of spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste**
1. In order to rationalize and organize the management of spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste, all companies referred to in art. 9-quinquies of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, as amended by paragraph 15 of this article, which do not adhere to the consortium referred to in the same article 9-quinquies, shall establish one or more consortia, which must adopt management systems compliant with the principles of article 237.
2. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 have the legal personality of a private non-profit entity and, except as provided for in paragraph 17, are governed by a statute adopted in accordance with a model statute drawn up by the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, to be published in the Official Gazette within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, in accordance with the principles of this decree and, in particular, with those of efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, and transparency, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The statute adopted by each consortium is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it within the following ninety days. If the Minister deems it not to approve the transmitted statute, for reasons of legitimacy or merit, he shall return it to the requesting consortium with the relative observations. The ministerial decree approving the consortia's statute is published in the Official Gazette.
3. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1, at the same time as the communication referred to in article 189, paragraph 3, must transmit a copy of the same communication to the consortium referred to in art. 9-quinquies, of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, as amended by this decree. The same sanctions provided for the failure to communicate under the aforementioned article 189, paragraph 3, apply to the violation of this obligation.
4. The consortia shall carry out the following tasks throughout the national territory:
a) ensure the management of spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste;
b) transfer the spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste to the companies that carry out their recovery;
c) ensure their disposal, if recovery is not possible or economically convenient, in compliance with anti-pollution provisions;
d) promote market research and technical-scientific research actions for the technological improvement of the production, recovery, and disposal cycle;
e) promote the raising of public and consumer awareness on the issues of collection and disposal of spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste.
5. The following shall participate in the consortia referred to in paragraph 1:
a) companies that carry out the recycling of spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste through the production of refined secondary lead or lead alloy;
b) companies that carry out the manufacturing or importation of lead-acid batteries;
c) companies that carry out the collection of spent lead-acid batteries and lead-containing waste;
d) companies that carry out the replacement and sale of lead-acid batteries.
6. The participation quotas of the members are determined annually according to the criteria set out in paragraph 3-bis of art. 9-quinquies, of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, as amended by paragraph 16 of this article.
7. The resolutions of the bodies of the consortia referred to in this article, adopted in relation to the purposes of the fourth part of this decree and in accordance with the statute, are mandatory for all participating companies.

---
8. Legal entities belonging to the categories referred to in paragraph 5 that are established or in any case begin one of the activities proper to the same categories after the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree shall join one of the consortia referred to in paragraph 1 within sixty days from the date of establishment or the start of their activity. It is also permitted for the same subjects, who are members of one of the consortia referred to in paragraph 1, to establish new consortia, after at least a biennium from the date of adhesion to the previous consortium and without prejudice to the obligation to pay the contributions accrued during the period.
9. Ninety days after the date of publication in the Official Gazette of the ministerial decree approving the statute referred to in paragraph 2, anyone holding spent lead-acid batteries or lead-containing waste is obliged to deliver them to the consortia, either directly or by delivery to subjects appointed by the consortium or authorized, according to current legislation, to carry out the management activities of such waste, without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 3. The obligation of delivery does not exclude the right of the holder to sell the spent batteries and lead-containing waste to companies of another Member State of the European Community.
10. In order to ensure the financial means for the consortia to carry out their tasks, a sales surcharge on batteries is established in relation to the weight content of lead, to be applied by the producers and importers of the batteries themselves, with the right of recourse against the purchasers in all subsequent stages of commercialization. The producers and importers shall pay the proceeds of the surcharge directly to the consortia.
11. By decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, the following are determined: the surcharge referred to in paragraph 10, the percentage of costs to be covered by the application of this surcharge.
12. Anyone who, by reason of their activity and pending delivery pursuant to paragraph 9, holds spent batteries is obliged to store the batteries themselves in a suitable container compliant with the provisions in force on waste disposal.
13. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 shall annually transmit to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory and to the Minister for Production Activities the preliminary and final budgets within sixty days of their approval; furthermore, by May 31 of each year, these subjects shall present to the same Ministers a technical report on the overall activity developed by them and by their individual members in the preceding solar year.
14. To paragraph 2 of art. 9-quinquies of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, the following letter is added: [....].
15. Paragraph 3 of article 9-quinquies, of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, is replaced by the following: [....].
16. After paragraph 3 of article 9-quinquies, of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, the following is inserted: [....].
17. Within twenty-four months* from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the Consortium referred to in Article 9-quinquies of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, shall adapt its statute to the principles contained in this decree and in particular to those of transparency, effectiveness, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The adopted statute is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, in the following ninety days, subject to reasoned observations to which the said Consortium is required to adapt in the following sixty days. Should the said Consortium not comply within the prescribed terms, the amendments to the statute shall be made by decree of the Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities.
18. For the achievement of the multiannual objectives of recovery and recycling, any management surpluses set aside by the consortia in the reserves constituting the net assets shall not contribute to the formation of income, provided that the prohibition of distribution, in any form, to the members of such surpluses and reserves is respected, even in the event of dissolution of the same consortia.
*Note: the original term of one hundred and eighty days was thus extended by effect of art. 5 of D.L. no. 300 of 28 December 2006 - so-called "Milleproroghe Decree" (G.U. no. 300 of 28/12/2006), as amended during conversion into L. no. 17/2007 (G.U. no. 47 of 26.2.2007, S.O. no. 48).

**Art. 236**
**National consortia for the management, collection, and treatment of used mineral oils**
1. In order to rationalize and organize the management of used mineral oils, to be obligatorily sent for regeneration aimed at the production of base oils, the companies referred to in paragraph 4 are required to participate in the fulfillment of the tasks provided for in paragraph 12 by joining the consortium referred to in art. 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, or one of the consortia to be established pursuant to paragraph 2. The consortia shall adopt management systems compliant with the principles of article 237.
2. Within twenty-four months* from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the consortium referred to in article 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, shall adapt its statute to the principles contained in this decree and in particular to those of transparency, effectiveness, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The adopted statute is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it in concert with the Minister of Production Activities in the following ninety days, subject to reasoned observations to which the Consortium is required to adapt in the following sixty days. Should the Consortium not comply within the prescribed terms, the amendments to the statute shall be made by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Production Activities. The Consortia referred to in paragraph 1 have the legal personality of a private non-profit entity and those other than the Consortium referred to in article 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, are governed by a statute adopted in accordance with a model statute drawn up by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, to be published in the Official Gazette within one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, in accordance with the principles of this decree and, in particular, with those of efficiency, effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, and transparency, as well as of free competition in the sector's activities. The statute adopted by each consortium is transmitted within fifteen days to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who approves it in the following ninety days, with his provision adopted in concert with the Minister of Production Activities. If the Minister deems it not to approve the transmitted statute, for reasons of legitimacy or merit, he shall return it to the requesting Consortium with the relative observations. The ministerial decree of approval of the Consortia's statute is published in the Official Gazette.
3. The Consortia referred to in paragraph 2 must transmit to the Consortium referred to in art. 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, at the same time as the communication referred to in article 189, paragraph 3, a copy of the same communication. The sanctions of article 258 for the failure to communicate as per article 189, paragraph 3, apply to the violation of this obligation. Companies that eliminate used mineral oils through co-combustion and are duly authorized for this purpose and the other consortia referred to in this article are required to provide the Consortium referred to in article 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, with the technical data referred to in paragraph 12, letter h), so that this consortium annually communicates all the data collected on a national basis to the Ministries that exercise control, accompanied by an illustrative report.
4. All companies that:
a) produce virgin base oils;
b) produce base oils from the regeneration process;
c) place lubricating oils on the consumer market.
5. The participation quotas in the Consortia are determined annually in proportion to the quantities of finished lubricating oils that each member places on the consumer market in the preceding year, with respect to the total lubricants placed on the consumer market in the same year by all participants in the Consortium itself.
6. The deliberations of the organs of the Consortia, adopted in relation to the purposes of the part
---
fourth part of this decree and in accordance with the statute, are binding for all consortium members. The representation in the elective bodies of the Consortia is attributed to the extent of eighty percent to the companies that produce virgin base oils and place finished lubricating oils on the market, and to the extent of twenty percent to the companies that produce and place on the consumer market regenerated lubricating oils.
7. The consortia annually determine, with reference to the costs incurred in the year net of revenues for the fulfillment of the obligations of this article, the contribution per kilogram of lubricating oil that will be placed on the market in the following year. For the purposes of the fourth part of this decree, base and finished lubricating oils are considered placed on the market at the time of payment of the consumption tax.
8. The participating companies are required to pay the consortium the contributions owed by each of them according to the methods and terms established pursuant to paragraph 9.
9. The methods and terms for the assessment, collection, and payment of the contributions referred to in paragraph 8 are established by decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance, in concert with the Ministers of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and of Production Activities, to be published in the Official Gazette within one month of the approval of the consortium's statute.
10. The consortia referred to in paragraph 1 shall annually transmit to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and to the Minister of Production Activities the preliminary and final budgets within sixty days of their approval. The Consortia referred to in paragraph 1, by May 31 of each year, shall present to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and to the Minister of Production Activities a technical report on the overall activity developed by them and by their individual members in the preceding solar year.
11. The statute referred to in paragraph 2 provides, in particular, for the organs of the consortia and the relative methods of appointment.
12. The consortia shall carry out the following tasks for the entire national territory:
a) promote public awareness on collection issues;
b) ensure and incentivize the collection of used oils by taking them back from holders and authorized companies;
c) directly carry out the collection of used oils from holders who request it in areas where collection is difficult or economically disadvantageous;
d) select the collected used oils for their correct elimination through regeneration, combustion, or disposal;
e) transfer the collected used oils:
1) as a priority, for regeneration aimed at the production of base oils;
2) in case of effective technical, economic, and organizational constraints, for combustion or co-incineration;
3) in the absence of the requirements for use as per the preceding numbers, for disposal through incineration or permanent storage;
f) pursue and incentivize the study, experimentation, and implementation of new treatment processes and alternative uses;
g) operate in compliance with the principles of competition, free circulation of goods, cost-effectiveness of management, as well as the protection of health and the environment from any pollution of the air, water, and soil;
h) record and process all technical data relating to the collection and elimination of used oils and communicate them annually to the Consortium referred to in art. 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, so that this Consortium transmits them to the Ministries that exercise control, accompanied by an illustrative report;
i) guarantee to regenerators, within the limits of the regenerable used oils collected and the plant's production, the quantities of used oils requested at a fair price and, in any case, not exceeding the direct cost of collection;
l) ensure the disposal of used oils in cases where recovery is not possible or economically convenient, in compliance with the provisions against pollution.
13. The consortia may carry out their functions either directly or through mandates conferred on companies for specific and limited sectors of activity or specific territorial areas. The activity of the agents is carried out under the direction and responsibility of the consortia themselves.
14. Legal entities belonging to the categories referred to in paragraph 4 that are established or in any case begin one of the activities proper to the same categories after
---
the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree shall join one of the Consortia referred to in paragraph 1, within sixty days from the date of establishment or the start of their own activity. It is also permitted for the aforementioned subjects, members of one of the Consortia referred to in paragraph 1, to establish new Consortia, after at least a biennium from the date of adhesion to the preceding Consortium and without prejudice to the obligation to pay the contributions accrued during the period.
15. Ninety days after the date of publication in the Official Gazette of the decree approving the statute referred to in paragraph 2, anyone who holds used mineral oils is obliged to deliver them to the Consortia referred to in paragraph 1, directly or by delivery to subjects appointed by the consortium or authorized, according to current legislation, to carry out the management activities of such waste. The obligation of delivery does not exclude the right of the holder to sell the used mineral oils to companies of another Member State of the European Community.
16. For the achievement of the multiannual objectives of recovery and recycling, any management surpluses set aside by the consortia referred to in paragraph 1 in the reserves constituting the net assets shall not contribute to the formation of income, provided that the prohibition of distribution, in any form, to the members of such surpluses and reserves is respected, even in the event of dissolution of the same consortia.
*Note: the original term of one hundred and eighty days was thus extended by effect of art. 5 of D.L. no. 300 of 28 December 2006 - so-called "Milleproroghe Decree" (G.U. no. 300 of 28/12/2006), as amended during conversion into L. no. 17/2007 (G.U. no. 47 of 26.2.2007, S.O. no. 48).

**Art. 237**
**Guiding criteria for management systems**
1. The management systems adopted must, in any case, be open to the participation of all operators and designed in such a way as to ensure the principle of transparency, non-discrimination, non-distortion of competition, free circulation, as well as the maximum possible efficiency.

**TITLE IV - TARIFF FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF URBAN WASTE**

**Art. 238**
**Tariff for the management of urban waste**
1. Anyone who possesses or holds for any reason premises, or open areas for private or public use not constituting an accessory or appurtenance of the same premises, for any use, existing in the areas of the municipal territory, that produce urban waste, is required to pay a tariff. The tariff constitutes the consideration for the performance of the service of collection, recovery, and disposal of solid urban waste and also includes the costs indicated in art. 15 of legislative decree no. 36 of 13 January 2003. The tariff referred to in art. 49 of legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997, is abolished from the date of entry into force of this article, except as provided for in paragraph 11.
2. The tariff for waste management is commensurate with the average ordinary quantities and qualities of waste produced per unit of surface area, in relation to the uses and type of activity carried out, on the basis of parameters, determined with the regulation referred to in paragraph 6, which also take into account income indices articulated by user groups and territories.
3. The tariff is determined, within three months from the date of entry into force of the decree referred to in paragraph 6, by the Area Authorities and is applied and collected by the subjects entrusted with the integrated management service on the basis of the criteria established by the regulation referred to in paragraph 6. The determination of the tariff also provides for the coverage of ancillary costs related to the management of urban waste such as, for example, the costs of street sweeping. If these costs are covered by the tariff, this must be highlighted in the financial plans and in the budgets of the subjects entrusted with the service.
4. The tariff is composed of a quota determined in relation to the essential components of the cost of the service, referring in particular to investments for the works and their related amortizations, as well as a quota related to the quantities of waste conferred to the service
---
provided and to the extent of the management costs, so that the full coverage of investment and operating costs is ensured.
5. The Area Authorities approve and present to the Authority referred to in Article 207 the financial plan and the related report prepared by the subject entrusted with the integrated management service. Within four years from the date of entry into force of the regulation referred to in paragraph 6, full coverage of the costs must be gradually ensured.
6. The Minister for the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister for Production Activities, after consulting the State-Regions Conference and the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, the qualified representatives of the economic and social interests present in the Economic and Social Council for Environmental Policies (CESPA), and the interested parties, shall regulate, with a specific regulation to be issued within six months from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree and in compliance with the provisions of this article, the general criteria on the basis of which the cost components are defined and the tariff is determined, also with reference to the reductions referred to in paragraph 7, while ensuring in any case the absence of charges for the interested authorities.
7. In determining the tariff, reductions may be provided for domestic users and for those used for seasonal or non-continuous use, duly documented and ascertained, which also take into account income indices articulated by user groups and territories. In this case, the financial plan must indicate the resources necessary to ensure the full coverage of the reduced revenues resulting from the reductions, according to the criteria established by the regulation referred to in paragraph 6.
8. The regulation referred to in paragraph 6 also takes into account the objectives of improving the productivity and quality of the service provided and the programmed inflation rate.
9. The possible modulation of the tariff takes into account the investments made by the municipalities or by the managers that are useful for the organization of the service.
10. A reduction coefficient is applied to the tariff, proportional to the quantities of assimilated waste that the producer demonstrates to have sent for recovery through a certificate issued by the subject who carries out the recovery activity of the waste itself.
11. Until the issuance of the regulation referred to in paragraph 6 and until the completion of the requirements for the application of the tariff, the existing regulatory disciplines shall continue to apply.
12. The voluntary and coercive collection of the tariff can be carried out according to the provisions of the decree of the President of the Republic of 29 September 1973, no. 602, through an agreement with the Revenue Agency.

**TITLE V - REMEDIATION OF CONTAMINATED SITES**

**Art. 239**
**Principles and scope of application**
1. This title regulates remediation and environmental restoration interventions for contaminated sites and defines the procedures, criteria, and methods for carrying out the necessary operations for the elimination of the sources of pollution and in any case for the reduction of the concentrations of polluting substances, in harmony with community principles and norms, with particular reference to the "polluter pays" principle.
2. Without prejudice to the discipline set forth in title 1 of the fourth part of this decree, the provisions of this title do not apply to:
a) the abandonment of waste regulated by the fourth part of this decree. In this case, if, following the removal, initiation of recovery, disposal of abandoned or uncontrollably deposited waste, an exceedance of the attention values is ascertained, it will be necessary to proceed with the characterization of the area for the purpose of any remediation and environmental restoration interventions to be carried out pursuant to this title;
b) remediation interventions governed by special laws, except within the limits of what is expressly referred to by the same or what is not regulated by them.
3. Remediation and environmental restoration interventions for areas characterized by diffuse pollution are regulated by the regions with specific plans, without prejudice to the competencies and procedures provided for sites subject to remediation of national interest and in any case in compliance with the general criteria of this title.

---
**Art. 240**
**Definitions**
1. For the purposes of applying this title, the following definitions apply:
a) site: the area or portion of territory, geographically defined and determined, understood in its various environmental matrices (soil, subsoil, and groundwater) and including any building and plant structures present;
b) contamination threshold concentrations (CSC): the contamination levels of the environmental matrices that constitute values above which the characterization of the site and the site-specific risk analysis are necessary, as identified in Annex 5 to the fourth part of this decree. In the case where the potentially contaminated site is located in an area affected by anthropic or natural phenomena that have caused the exceedance of one or more contamination threshold concentrations, these latter are assumed to be equal to the existing background value for all the exceeded parameters;
c) risk threshold concentrations (CSR): the contamination levels of the environmental matrices, to be determined on a case-by-case basis by applying the site-specific risk analysis procedure according to the principles illustrated in Annex 1 to the fourth part of this decree and on the basis of the results of the characterization plan, the exceedance of which requires safety measures and remediation. The concentration levels so defined constitute the acceptability levels for the site;
d) potentially contaminated site: a site in which one or more concentration values of the pollutants found in the environmental matrices are higher than the contamination threshold concentration values (CSC), pending the completion of the characterization and site-specific health and environmental risk analysis operations, which will allow the determination of the state of contamination or not on the basis of the risk threshold concentrations (CSR);
e) contaminated site: a site in which the risk threshold concentration values (CSR), determined by applying the risk analysis procedure referred to in Annex 1 to the fourth part of this decree on the basis of the results of the characterization plan, are exceeded;
f) uncontaminated site: a site in which the contamination found in the environmental matrices is lower than the contamination threshold concentration values (CSC) or, if higher, is still lower than the risk threshold concentration values (CSR) determined following the site-specific health and environmental risk analysis;
g) site with ongoing activity: a site in which productive activities, both industrial and commercial, are in operation, as well as the appurtenant areas and those used for ancillary economic activities, including maintenance and heritage protection activities for the purpose of the subsequent resumption of activities;
h) decommissioned site: a site where productive activities have ceased;
i) prevention measures: initiatives to counter an event, an act, or an omission that has created an imminent threat to health or the environment, understood as a sufficiently probable risk that damage to health or the environment will occur in the near future, in order to prevent or minimize the occurrence of such a threat;
l) remediation measures: any action or combination of actions, including mitigation or provisional measures aimed at repairing, restoring, or replacing damaged natural resources and/or services, or providing an equivalent alternative to such resources or services;
m) emergency safety measures: any immediate or short-term intervention, to be implemented in the emergency conditions referred to in letter t) in case of sudden contamination events of any nature, aimed at containing the diffusion of the primary sources of contamination, preventing their contact with other matrices present on the site, and removing them, pending any further remediation or operational or permanent safety measures;
n) operational safety measures: the set of interventions carried out in a site with ongoing activity aimed at ensuring an adequate level of safety for people and the environment, pending further permanent safety or remediation interventions to be carried out upon cessation of the activity. They also include the contamination containment interventions to be implemented on a transitional basis until the execution of the remediation or permanent safety measures, in order to prevent the diffusion of contamination.
---
within the same matrix or between different matrices. In such cases, suitable monitoring and control plans must be prepared to verify the effectiveness of the adopted solutions;
o) permanent safety measures: the set of interventions aimed at definitively isolating the sources of pollution with respect to the surrounding environmental matrices and ensuring a high and definitive level of safety for people and the environment. In such cases, monitoring and control plans and land use limitations with respect to the provisions of urban planning instruments must be provided;
p) remediation: the set of interventions aimed at eliminating the sources of pollution and polluting substances or reducing their concentrations present in the soil, subsoil, and groundwater to a level equal to or lower than the risk threshold concentration values (CSR);
q) restoration and environmental restoration: the interventions of environmental and landscape redevelopment, also constituting a complement to the remediation or permanent safety interventions, which allow the site to be recovered for its effective and definitive usability for the intended use in conformity with urban planning instruments;
r) diffuse pollution: the contamination or chemical, physical, or biological alterations of the environmental matrices determined by diffuse sources and not attributable to a single origin;
s) site-specific health and environmental risk analysis: site-specific analysis of the effects on human health deriving from prolonged exposure to the action of substances present in the contaminated environmental matrices, conducted with the criteria indicated in Annex 1 to the fourth part of this decree;
t) emergency conditions: events upon the occurrence of which the execution of emergency interventions is necessary, such as:
1) current or potential concentrations of vapors in confined spaces close to explosive levels or suitable to cause acute harmful effects to health;
2) presence of significant quantities of product in a separate phase on the ground or in surface water courses or in the aquifer;
3) contamination of wells for drinking water or agricultural purposes;
4) risk of fires and explosions.

**Art. 241**
**Regulation of agricultural areas**
1. The regulation relating to remediation, environmental restoration, and emergency, operational, and permanent safety measures for areas intended for agricultural production and livestock farming is adopted by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities, Health, and Agricultural and Forestry Policies.

**Art. 242**
**Operational and administrative procedures**
1. Upon the occurrence of an event that is potentially capable of contaminating the site, the person responsible for the pollution shall, within twenty-four hours, implement the necessary prevention measures and immediately communicate this to the authorities pursuant to and with the methods of Article 304, paragraph 2. The same procedure applies to the identification of historical contaminations that may still pose risks of aggravating the contamination situation.
2. The person responsible for the pollution, having implemented the necessary prevention measures, shall carry out, in the areas affected by the contamination, a preliminary investigation on the parameters subject to the pollution and, if it is ascertained that the contamination threshold concentration (CSC) level has not been exceeded, shall proceed to restore the contaminated area, giving notice thereof, with a specific self-certification, to the municipality and the competent province for the territory within forty-eight hours of the communication. The self-certification concludes the notification procedure of this article, without prejudice to the verification and control activities by the competent authority to be carried out in the following fifteen days. In the case where the pollution is not attributable to a single event, the parameters to be evaluated must be identified on a case-by-case basis, based on the history of the site and the activities carried out there over time.
3. If the preliminary investigation referred to in paragraph 2 ascertains that the CSC has been exceeded even for a single parameter, the person responsible for the pollution shall immediately notify the municipality and the competent provinces for the territory, with a description of the prevention and emergency safety measures adopted. In the following thirty days, he shall present to the aforementioned administrations, as well as to the territorially competent region, the characterization plan with the requirements of Annex 2 to the fourth part of this decree. Within the following thirty days, the region, having convened the services conference, shall authorize the characterization plan with any supplementary prescriptions. The regional authorization constitutes consent for all works connected to the characterization, replacing any other authorization, concession, concert, agreement, or permit from the public administration.
4. On the basis of the results of the characterization, the site-specific risk analysis procedure is applied to the site for the determination of the risk threshold concentrations (CSR). The criteria for the application of the risk analysis procedure are reported in Annex 1 to the fourth part of this decree. Within six months of the approval of the characterization plan, the responsible party shall present the results of the risk analysis to the region. The services conference convened by the region, following the investigation carried out in contradiction with the responsible party, who is given at least twenty days' notice, shall approve the risk analysis document within sixty days of its receipt. This document is sent to the members of the services conference at least twenty days before the date set for the conference and, in the case of a majority decision, the resolution of adoption shall provide an adequate and analytical motivation with respect to the dissenting opinions expressed during the conference.
5. If the results of the risk analysis procedure show that the concentration of contaminants present on the site is lower than the risk threshold concentrations, the services conference, with the approval of the risk analysis document, shall declare the procedure positively concluded. In this case, the services conference may prescribe the implementation of a monitoring program on the site regarding the stabilization of the situation found in relation to the results of the risk analysis and the current land use destination. To this end, the responsible party, within sixty days of the above approval, shall send to the competent province and region for the territory a monitoring plan in which are identified:
a) the parameters to be monitored;
b) the frequency and duration of the monitoring.
6. The region, after consulting the province, shall approve the monitoring plan within thirty days of its receipt. The aforementioned term may be suspended once only, if the competent authority deems it necessary to request, by means of an adequately motivated act, documentary integrations or further details of the project, assigning a suitable term for compliance. In this case, the term for approval shall run from the receipt of the integrated project. At the end of the monitoring period, the responsible party shall communicate this to the region and the province, sending a technical report summarizing the results of the monitoring carried out. In the case where the monitoring activities reveal the exceedance of one or more of the risk threshold concentrations, the responsible party must initiate the remediation procedure of paragraph 7.
7. If the results of the risk analysis procedure show that the concentration of contaminants present on the site is higher than the risk threshold concentration values (CSR), the responsible party shall submit to the region, within the following six months from the approval of the risk analysis document, the operational project for the remediation or safety measures, operational or permanent, and, where necessary, the further measures of repair and environmental restoration, in order to minimize and reduce to an acceptable level the risk deriving from the state of contamination present on the site. The region, having acquired the opinion of the municipality and the interested province through a specific services conference and having heard the responsible party, shall approve the project, with any prescriptions and integrations, within sixty days of its receipt. This term may be suspended once only, if the region deems it necessary to request, by means of an adequately motivated act, documentary integrations or further details of the project, assigning a suitable term for compliance. In this hypothesis, the term for the approval of the project shall run from the presentation of the integrated project. For the sole purposes of the realization and operation of the plants and equipment necessary for the implementation of the operational project and for the time strictly necessary for its implementation
---
the same, the regional authorization referred to in this paragraph replaces for all purposes the authorizations, concessions, agreements, understandings, no-objections, opinions, and consents provided for by current legislation, including, in particular, those relating to the environmental impact assessment, where necessary, the management of excavated soil and rocks within the area subject to the intervention, and the discharge of water drawn from the aquifers. The authorization also constitutes a zoning variance and entails a declaration of public utility, urgency, and non-deferability of the works. With the project approval measure, the execution times are also established, also indicating any necessary prescriptions for the execution of the works, and the amount of the financial guarantees is fixed, in an amount not exceeding fifty percent of the estimated cost of the intervention, which must be provided in favor of the region for the correct execution and completion of the same interventions.
8. The criteria for the selection and execution of remediation and environmental restoration interventions, operational or permanent safety measures, as well as for the identification of the best available techniques at sustainable costs (B.A.T.N.E.E.C. - Best Available Technology Not Entailing Excessive Costs) pursuant to community regulations are reported in Annex 3 to the fourth part of this decree.
9. The operational safety measures, concerning contaminated sites with ongoing activities, guarantee adequate health and environmental safety and prevent further propagation of contaminants. The operational safety measure projects are accompanied by accurate plans for monitoring the effectiveness of the adopted measures and indicate whether, upon cessation of the activity, a remediation or permanent safety measure intervention will be necessary.
10. In the case of characterization, remediation, safety measures, and environmental restoration of sites with ongoing activities, the region, without prejudice to the obligation to guarantee the protection of public health and the environment, when approving the project, shall ensure that the said interventions are structured in such a way as to be compatible with the continuation of the activity.
11. In the case of events that occurred before the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, which subsequently manifest themselves on that date in the absence of immediate risk to the environment and public health, the interested party shall communicate to the competent region, province, and municipality the existence of a potential contamination together with the site characterization plan, in order to determine its extent and extension with reference to the parameters indicated in the CSCs and shall apply the procedures of paragraphs 4 and following.
12. The investigations and preliminary activities are carried out by the province, which avails itself of the technical competence of the Regional Agency for Environmental Protection and coordinates with the other administrations.
13. The procedure for approving the characterization and the remediation project takes place in a Services Conference convened by the region and constituted by the administrations ordinarily competent to issue the permits, authorizations, and concessions for the realization of the interventions included in the plan and in the project. The relative documentation is sent to the members of the services conference at least twenty days before the date set for the discussion and, in the case of a majority decision, the resolution of adoption must provide an adequate and analytical motivation with respect to the dissenting opinions expressed during the conference. The province is responsible for issuing the certification of completed remediation. If the province does not proceed to issue this certification within thirty days of receiving the resolution of adoption, the region shall issue it.

**Art. 243**
**Groundwater**
1. Groundwater drawn from underground aquifers, within the scope of remediation interventions of a site, may be discharged, directly or after being used in production cycles in operation on the site itself, in compliance with the emission limits for industrial wastewater into surface waters as per this decree.
2. In derogation of the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 104, for the sole purposes of aquifer remediation, the reinjection, after treatment, of groundwater into the same geological unit from which it was extracted is permitted, indicating the type of treatment, the qualitative-quantitative characteristics of the reinjected water, the methods of reinjection, and the safety measures for the portion of the aquifer affected by the extraction/reinjection system. The reinjected water must have undergone a treatment aimed at the remediation of the aquifer and must not contain other discharged waters or other dangerous substances, different in quality and quantity, from those present in the drawn water.

**Art. 244**
**Ordinances**
1. Public administrations that, in the exercise of their functions, identify sites in which they ascertain that the contamination levels are higher than the contamination threshold values, shall communicate this to the competent region, province, and municipality.
2. The province, having received the communication referred to in paragraph 1, after having carried out the appropriate investigations aimed at identifying the person responsible for the exceedance event and having heard the municipality, shall, with a motivated ordinance, order the person responsible for the potential contamination to proceed pursuant to this title.
3. The ordinance referred to in paragraph 2 is in any case also notified to the owner of the site for the purposes and effects of Article 253.
4. If the person responsible is not identifiable or does not take action and neither the owner of the site nor any other interested party takes action, the interventions that become necessary pursuant to the provisions of this title are adopted by the competent administration in accordance with the provisions of Article 250.

**Art. 245**
**Obligations of intervention and notification by parties not responsible for the potential contamination**
1. The procedures for safety, remediation, and environmental restoration interventions regulated by this title may in any case be initiated on the initiative of the interested non-responsible parties.
2. Without prejudice to the obligations of the person responsible for the potential contamination under Article 242, the owner or manager of the area who detects the exceedance or the concrete and current danger of exceedance of the contamination threshold concentrations (CSC) must notify the competent region, province, and municipality and implement the prevention measures according to the procedure of Article 242. The province, once it has received the above communications, shall take action, after consulting the municipality, to identify the responsible party in order to proceed with the remediation interventions. The owner or another interested party is in any case granted the right to intervene voluntarily at any time to carry out the necessary interventions within the site under their ownership or availability.
3. If the interested parties proceed pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 within six months from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, or have already done so previously, the start of the obligation for the remediation of sites for events prior to the entry into force of the fourth part of this decree will be defined by the competent region for the territory on the basis of the dangerousness of the site, determined in general by the regional plan for the remediation of polluted areas or by its possible excerpts, without prejudice in any case to the right of the interested parties to proceed with the interventions before the aforementioned deadline.

**Art. 246**
**Program agreements**
1. The subjects obliged to carry out the interventions of this title and the other interested subjects have the right to define the methods and timing for the execution of the interventions through specific program agreements stipulated, within six months of the approval of the risk analysis document of Article 242, with the competent administrations pursuant to the provisions of this title.
2. In the case where there are subjects who intend or are required to provide for the simultaneous remediation of a plurality of sites affecting the territory of multiple regions, the times and methods of intervention can be defined with specific program agreements stipulated, within twelve months of the approval of the risk analysis document of Article 242, with the interested regions.
3. In the case where there are subjects who intend or are required to provide for the simultaneous remediation of a plurality of sites located throughout the national territory or there are multiple subjects interested in the remediation of the same site of national interest, the times and methods of intervention can be defined with a program agreement to be stipulated, within eighteen months of the approval of the risk analysis document of Article 242, with the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Ministers of Health and of Production Activities, in agreement with the State-Regions Conference.

**Art. 247**
**Sites subject to seizure**
1. In the case where the polluted site is subject to seizure, the judicial authority that ordered it may authorize access to the site for the execution of safety, remediation, and environmental restoration interventions of the areas, also for the purpose of preventing the further propagation of pollutants and the consequent worsening of the environmental situation.

**Art. 248**
**Controls**
1. The documentation relating to the site characterization plan and the operational project, including the repair measures, the monitoring to be carried out, the use limitations, and the prescriptions possibly dictated pursuant to Article 242, paragraph 4, is transmitted to the competent province and Regional Agency for Environmental Protection for the purpose of carrying out controls on the conformity of the interventions with the approved projects.
2. The completion of remediation, permanent safety, and operational safety interventions, as well as their conformity to the approved project, are ascertained by the province through a specific certification based on a technical report prepared by the territorially competent Regional Agency for Environmental Protection.
3. The certification referred to in paragraph 2 constitutes a title for the release of the financial guarantees referred to in Article 242, paragraph 7.

**Art. 249**
**Small-scale contaminated areas**
1. For small-scale contaminated areas, the simplified intervention procedures reported in Annex 4 to the fourth part of this decree apply.

**Art. 250**
**Remediation by the administration**
1. If the parties responsible for the contamination do not directly carry out the fulfillments ordered by this title, or if they are not identifiable and neither the owner of the site nor other interested parties take action, the procedures and interventions of Article 242 are carried out ex officio by the territorially competent municipality and, if this does not take action, by the region, according to the order of priority established by the regional plan for the remediation of polluted areas, also using other public or private entities, identified as a result of specific public evidence procedures. In order to advance the sums for the aforementioned interventions, the regions may establish specific funds within their budget availability.

**Art. 251**
**Census and registry of sites to be remediated**
1. The regions, on the basis of the criteria defined by the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), shall prepare the registry of sites subject to remediation procedures, which must contain:
a) the list of sites subject to remediation and environmental restoration intervention as well as the interventions carried out in the same sites;
b) the identification of the subjects to whom the remediation is incumbent;
c) the public entities that the region intends to use, in case of non-compliance by the obliged subjects, for the purposes of ex officio execution, without prejudice to the awarding of the necessary works through public tender or recourse to the procedures of Article 242.
2. If, following the site-specific risk analysis, an exceedance of the risk concentrations is ascertained, this situation is reported in the urban destination certificate, as well as in the cartography and in the implementation technical standards of the general urban planning instrument of the municipality and is communicated to the competent State Revenue Office.
3. To ensure the effectiveness of the collection and transfer of data and information, the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) shall define, in collaboration with the regions and the regional agencies for environmental protection, the contents and structure of the essential data of the registry, as well as the methods for their transposition into information systems connected to the network of the National Environmental Information System (SINA).

**Art. 252**
**Sites of national interest**
1. Sites of national interest, for the purposes of remediation, are identifiable in relation to the characteristics of the site, the quantities and hazardousness of the pollutants present, the significance of the impact on the surrounding environment in terms of health and ecological risk, as well as prejudice to cultural and environmental assets.
2. The identification of sites of national interest is provided for by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in agreement with the interested regions, according to the following principles and guiding criteria:
a) remediation interventions must concern areas and territories, including water bodies, of particular environmental value;
b) remediation must concern areas and territories protected pursuant to legislative decree no. 42 of 22 January 2004;
c) the health and environmental risk deriving from the detected exceedance of the risk threshold concentrations must be particularly high due to the density of the population or the extension of the interested area;
d) the socio-economic impact caused by the pollution of the area must be significant;
e) the contamination must constitute a risk to assets of historical and cultural interest of national relevance;
f) the interventions to be implemented must concern sites included in the territory of more than one region.
3. For the purposes of the perimeter definition of the site, the municipalities, provinces, regions, and other local authorities are consulted, ensuring the participation of the responsible parties as well as the owners of the areas to be remediated, if different from the responsible parties.
4. The remediation procedure of Article 242 for sites of national interest is attributed to the competence of the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, after consulting the Ministry of Production Activities. The Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory may also avail itself of the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), the regional agencies for the protection of the environment of the interested regions, and the National Institute of Health, as well as other qualified public or private entities.
5. In the case where the responsible party does not take action or is not identifiable, or the owner of the contaminated site or another interested party does not take action, the interventions are prepared by the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, availing itself of the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), the National Institute of Health, and E.N.E.A., as well as other qualified public or private entities.
6. The authorization of the project and the related interventions replaces for all purposes the authorizations, concessions, agreements, understandings, no-objections, opinions, and consents provided for by current legislation, including, among others, those relating to the realization and operation of the plants and equipment necessary for their implementation. The authorization also constitutes a zoning variance and entails a declaration of public utility, urgency, and non-deferability of the works.
7. If the project provides for the realization of works subject to an environmental impact assessment procedure, the approval of the remediation project also includes such an assessment.
8. Pending the finalization of the authorization measure of the preceding paragraphs, once the technical investigation is completed, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory may authorize, on a provisional basis, upon request of the interested party, where there are urgent reasons and without prejudice to the acquisition of the positive opinion of the environmental compatibility assessment, where provided, the start of the works for the realization of the related remediation interventions, according to the positively evaluated project, with any prescriptions, from the services conference convened by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory. The provisional authorization produces the effects of Article 242, paragraph 7.
9. The area affected by the remediation of the former Strillale landfill (Grosseto) is qualified as a site of national interest under current legislation. A subsequent decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory will provide for the perimeter definition of the aforementioned area.

**Art. 253**
**Real burdens and special privileges**
1. The interventions of this title constitute a real burden on the contaminated sites if carried out ex officio by the competent authority pursuant to Article 250. The real burden is registered following the approval of the remediation project and must be indicated in the urban destination certificate.
2. The costs incurred for the interventions of paragraph 1 are secured by a special real estate privilege on the same areas, pursuant to and for the effects of Article 2748, second paragraph, of the civil code. This privilege can also be exercised to the detriment of the rights acquired by third parties on the property.
3. The privilege and the repetition of the costs can be exercised, against the owner of the site who is not guilty of the pollution or the danger of pollution, only following a motivated measure of the competent authority which justifies, among other things, the impossibility of ascertaining the identity of the responsible party or which justifies the impossibility of exercising recourse actions against the same party or their ineffectiveness.
4. In any case, the owner not responsible for the pollution may be required to reimburse, on the basis of a motivated measure and in compliance with the provisions of law no. 241 of 7 August 1990, the costs of the interventions adopted by the competent authority only within the limits of the market value of the site determined following the execution of the same interventions. In the case where the owner not responsible for the pollution has spontaneously provided for the remediation of the polluted site, he has the right to recourse against the person responsible for the pollution for the costs incurred and for any greater damage suffered.
5. The remediation interventions of polluted sites may be assisted, on the basis of a specific legislative financing provision, by public contributions within the maximum limit of fifty percent of the related costs if there are pre-eminent public interests connected to needs of health and environmental protection or occupational needs. The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 do not apply to the aforesaid public contributions.

**TITLE VI - SANCTION SYSTEM AND TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS**

**CHAPTER I - SANCTIONS**

**Art. 254**
**Special rules**
1. The sanctions provided for by special rules in force remain unaffected.

**Art. 255**
**Abandonment of waste**
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 256, paragraph 2, anyone who, in violation of the provisions of Articles 192, paragraphs 1 and 2, 226, paragraph 2, and 231, paragraphs 1 and 2, abandons or deposits waste or introduces it into surface or underground waters is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from one hundred and five euros to six hundred and twenty euros. If the abandonment of waste on the ground concerns non-hazardous and non-bulky waste, the administrative pecuniary sanction from twenty-five euros to one hundred and fifty-five euros applies.
2. The holder of the collection center, the concessionaire, or the holder of the branch of the manufacturing house who violates the provisions of Article 231, paragraph 5, is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from two hundred and sixty euros to one thousand five hundred and fifty euros.
3. Anyone who does not comply with the Mayor's ordinance, as per Article 192, paragraph 3, or does not fulfill the obligation of Article 187, paragraph 3, is punished with imprisonment for up to one year. In the conviction sentence or in the sentence issued pursuant to Article 444 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the benefit of the conditional suspension of the penalty may be subordinated to the execution of the provisions of the ordinance of Article 192, paragraph 3, or to the fulfillment of the obligation of Article 187, paragraph 3.

**Art. 256**
**Unauthorized waste management activities**
1. Anyone who carries out an activity of collection, transport, recovery, disposal, trade, and intermediation of waste without the prescribed authorization, registration, or communication of Articles 208, 209, 210, 211, 212, 214, 215, and 216 is punished:
a) with the penalty of arrest from three months to one year or with a fine from two thousand six hundred euros to twenty-six thousand euros if it concerns non-hazardous waste;
b) with the penalty of arrest from six months to two years and with a fine from two thousand six hundred euros to twenty-six thousand euros if it concerns hazardous waste.
2. The penalties of paragraph 1 apply to the owners of companies and the heads of entities that abandon or deposit waste in an uncontrolled manner or introduce it into surface or underground waters in violation of the prohibition of Article 192, paragraphs 1 and 2.
3. Anyone who creates or manages an unauthorized landfill is punished with the penalty of arrest from six months to two years and with a fine from two thousand six hundred euros to twenty-six thousand euros. The penalty of arrest from one to three years and a fine from five thousand two hundred euros to fifty-two thousand euros applies if the landfill is intended, even in part, for the disposal of hazardous waste. The conviction sentence or the sentence issued pursuant to Article 444 of the Code of Criminal Procedure entails the confiscation of the area on which the illegal landfill is located if it is owned by the author or accomplice of the crime, without prejudice to the obligations of remediation or restoration of the state of the places.
4. The penalties of paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 are reduced by half in the cases of non-compliance with the prescriptions contained or referred to in the authorizations, as well as in the cases of lack of the requirements and conditions required for the registrations or communications.
5. Anyone who, in violation of the prohibition of Article 187, carries out unauthorized waste mixing activities, is punished with the penalty of paragraph 1, letter b).
6. Anyone who carries out temporary storage at the place of production of hazardous medical waste, in violation of the provisions of Article 227, paragraph 1, letter b), is punished with the penalty of arrest from three months to one year or with the penalty of a fine from two thousand six hundred euros to twenty-six thousand euros. The administrative pecuniary sanction from two thousand six hundred euros to fifteen thousand five hundred euros applies for quantities not exceeding two hundred liters or equivalent quantities.
7. Anyone who violates the obligations of Articles 231, paragraphs 7, 8, and 9, 233, paragraphs 12 and 13, and 234, paragraph 14, is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from two hundred and sixty euros to one thousand five hundred and fifty euros.
8. The subjects of Articles 233, 234, 235, and 236 who do not fulfill the participation obligations provided therein are punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from eight thousand euros to forty-five thousand euros, without prejudice in any case to the obligation to pay the past contributions. Until the adoption of the decree of Article 234, paragraph 2, the sanctions of this paragraph are not applicable to the subjects of the same Article 234.
9. The sanctions of paragraph 8 are reduced by half in the case of adhesion made within the sixtieth day from the expiry of the term to fulfill the participation obligations provided for by Articles 233, 234, 235, and 236.

**Art. 257**
**Remediation of sites**
1. Anyone who causes the pollution of the soil, subsoil, surface waters, or groundwater with the exceedance of the risk threshold concentrations is punished with the penalty of arrest from six months to one year or with a fine from two thousand six hundred euros to twenty-six thousand euros, if they do not provide for remediation in accordance with the project approved by the competent authority within the procedure of Articles 242 and following. In case of failure to make the communication of Article 242, the transgressor is punished with the penalty of arrest from three months to one year or with a fine from one thousand euros to twenty-six thousand euros.
2. The penalty of arrest from one year to two years and the penalty of a fine from five thousand two hundred euros to fifty-two thousand euros applies if the pollution is caused by hazardous substances.
3. In the conviction sentence for the contravention of paragraphs 1 and 2, or in the sentence issued pursuant to Article 444 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the benefit of the conditional suspension of the penalty may be subordinated to the execution of emergency, remediation, and environmental restoration interventions.
4. The observance of the projects approved pursuant to Articles 242 and following constitutes a condition of non-puni-shability for the environmental crimes contemplated by other laws for the same event and for the same polluting conduct of paragraph 1.

**Art. 258**
**Violation of communication obligations, keeping of mandatory registers, and forms**
1. The subjects of Article 189, paragraph 3, who do not make the communication prescribed therein or make it in an incomplete or inaccurate manner are punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from two thousand six hundred euros to fifteen thousand five hundred euros; if the communication is made within the sixtieth day from the expiry of the term established pursuant to law no. 70 of 25 January 1994, the administrative pecuniary sanction from twenty-six euros to one hundred and sixty euros applies.
2. Anyone who omits to keep or keeps in an incomplete manner the loading and unloading register of Article 190, paragraph 1, is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from two thousand six hundred euros to fifteen thousand five hundred euros. If the register relates to hazardous waste, the administrative pecuniary sanction from fifteen thousand five hundred euros to ninety-three thousand euros applies, as well as the ancillary administrative sanction of suspension from one month to one year from the position held by the person responsible for the infringement and from the position of administrator.
3. In the case of companies that employ fewer than 15 employees, the minimum and maximum measures of paragraph 2 are reduced respectively from one thousand and forty euros to six thousand two hundred euros for non-hazardous waste and from two thousand and seventy euros to twelve thousand four hundred euros for hazardous waste. The number of employees is calculated with reference to the number of employees employed on average full-time during a year, while part-time and seasonal workers represent fractions of annual work units; for the aforesaid purposes, the year to be considered is that of the last approved financial year, preceding the moment of ascertainment of the infringement.
4. Anyone who transports waste without the form of Article 193 or indicates incomplete or inaccurate data in the same form is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from one thousand six hundred euros to nine thousand three hundred euros. The penalty of art. 483 of the penal code applies in the case of transport of hazardous waste. This latter penalty also applies to those who, in the preparation of a waste analysis certificate, provide false indications on the nature, composition, and chemical-physical characteristics of the waste and to those who use a false certificate during transport.
5. If the indications of paragraphs 1 and 2 are formally incomplete or inaccurate but the data reported in the communication to the cadastre, in the loading and unloading registers, in the identification forms of the transported waste, and in the other accounting records kept by law allow for the reconstruction of the due information, the administrative pecuniary sanction from two hundred and sixty euros to one thousand five hundred and fifty euros applies. The same penalty applies if the indications of paragraph 43 are formally incomplete or inaccurate but contain all the elements to reconstruct the information due by law, as well as in cases of failure to send to the competent authorities and failure to keep the registers of Article 190, paragraph 1, or the form of Article 193.

**Art. 259**
Illicit trafficking of waste
1. Anyone who carries out a shipment of waste constituting illicit traffic pursuant to art. 26 of Regulation (EEC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993, or carries out a shipment of waste listed in Annex II of the said regulation in violation of Article 1, paragraph 3, letters a), b), c), and d), of the same regulation is punished with a fine from one thousand five hundred and fifty euros to twenty-six thousand euros and with arrest for up to two years. The penalty is increased in the case of shipment of hazardous waste.
2. The conviction sentence, or that issued pursuant to Article 444 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for the crimes relating to the illicit traffic of paragraph 1 or to the illicit transport of Articles 256 and 258, paragraph 4, mandatorily entails the confiscation of the means of transport.

**Art. 260**
**Organized activities for the illicit trafficking of waste**
1. Anyone who, for the purpose of obtaining an unjust profit, with multiple operations and through the preparation of means and continuous organized activities, cedes, receives, transports, exports, imports, or in any case manages illegally large quantities of waste is punished with imprisonment from one to six years.
2. If it concerns highly radioactive waste, the penalty of imprisonment from three to eight years applies.
3. The conviction entails the accessory penalties of Articles 28, 30, 32-bis, and 32-ter of the penal code, with the limitation of art. 33 of the same code.
4. The judge, with the conviction sentence or with that issued pursuant to Article 444 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, orders the restoration of the state of the environment and may subordinate the granting of the conditional suspension of the penalty to the elimination of the damage or danger to the environment.

**Art. 261**
**Packaging**
1. Producers and users who do not comply with the collection obligation of Article 221, paragraph 2, or do not adopt, as an alternative, management systems pursuant to the same Article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), are punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction equal to six times the sums due to CONAI, without prejudice in any case to the obligation to pay the past contributions.
2. Packaging producers who do not organize a system for the fulfillment of the obligations of Article 221, paragraph 3, and do not adhere to the consortia of Article 223, nor adopt a system for the return of their own packaging pursuant to Article 221, paragraph 3, letters a) and c), are punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from fifteen thousand five hundred euros to forty-six thousand five hundred euros. The same penalty applies to users who do not comply with the obligation of Article 221, paragraph 4.
3. The violation of the prohibitions of Article 226, paragraphs 1 and 4, is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from five thousand two hundred euros to forty thousand euros. The same penalty applies to anyone who places on the domestic market packaging lacking the requirements of Article 219, paragraph 5.
4. The violation of the provision of Article 226, paragraph 3, is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from two thousand six hundred euros to fifteen thousand five hundred euros.

**Art. 262**
**Competence and jurisdiction**
1. Without prejudice to the other provisions of law no. 689 of 24 November 1981, regarding the ascertainment of administrative offenses, the province in whose territory the violation was committed is responsible for the imposition of the administrative pecuniary sanctions provided for by the fourth part of this decree, with the exception of the sanctions provided for by Article 261, paragraph 3, in relation to the prohibition of Article 226, paragraph 1, for which the municipality is competent.
2. Against the injunction orders relating to the administrative sanctions of paragraph 1, the opposition judgment of art. 23 of law no. 689 of 24 November 1981 is available.
3. For the criminal proceedings pending at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the judicial authority, if it does not have to issue a decree of dismissal or a sentence of acquittal, shall order the transmission of the documents to the Entities indicated in paragraph 1 for the application of the administrative sanctions.

**Art. 263**
**Proceeds from administrative pecuniary sanctions**
1. The proceeds of the administrative pecuniary sanctions for the violations of the provisions of the fourth part of this decree are devolved to the provinces and are intended for the exercise of control functions in environmental matters, except for the proceeds of the administrative pecuniary sanctions of Article 261, paragraph 3, in relation to the prohibition of Article 226, paragraph 1, which are devolved to the municipalities.

**CHAPTER II - TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS**

**Art. 264**
**Repeal of norms**
1. As of the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, the following are or remain repealed, excluding the provisions for which this decree provides for their continued validity:
a) law no. 366 of 20 March 1941;
b) the decree of the President of the Republic no. 915 of 10 September 1982;
c) decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, with the exception of Article 9 and Article 9-quinquies as reformulated by this decree. In order to ensure that there is no solution of continuity in the transition from the pre-existing legislation to that provided for by the fourth part of this decree, the implementing provisions of art. 9-quinquies, of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, shall continue to apply until the date of entry into force of the corresponding implementing provisions provided for by the fourth part of this decree;
d) decree-law no. 361 of 31 August 1987, converted, with amendments, by law no. 441 of 29 October 1987, with the exception of articles 1, 1-bis, 1-ter, 1-quater, and 1-quinquies;
e) decree-law no. 527 of 14 December 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 45 of 10 February 1988;
f) art. 29-bis of decree-law no. 331 of 30 August 1993, converted, with amendments, by law no. 427 of 29 October 1993;
g) paragraphs 3, 4, and 5, second period, of art. 103 of legislative decree no. 285 of 30 April 1992;
h) art. 5, paragraph 1, of the decree of the President of the Republic of 8 August 1994, published in the official gazette no. 251 of 26 October 1994;
i) legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997. In order to ensure that there is no solution of continuity in the transition from the pre-existing legislation to that provided for by the fourth part of this decree, the implementing provisions of the said legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997, shall continue to apply until the date of entry into force of the corresponding implementing provisions provided for by the fourth part of this decree;
l) art. 14 of decree-law no. 138 of 8 July 2002, converted, with amendments, by article 14 of law no. 178 of 8 August 2002;
m) article 9, paragraph 2-bis, of law no. 342 of 21 November 2000, last period, from the words: "the subjects referred to in article 38, paragraph 3, letter a)" to the word: "CONAI";
n) article 19 of legislative decree no. 504 of 30 December 1992;
o) articles 4, 5, 8, 12, 14, and 15 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992. All authorizations granted, at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, pursuant to the current legislation, including legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997, legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, and decree no. 392 of 16 May 1996, published in the official gazette no. 173 of 25 July 1996, remain valid for the management of used oils, until the achievement or denial of those requested pursuant to this decree and for a period in any case not exceeding a triennium from its date of entry into force. In order to ensure that there is no solution of continuity in the transition from the pre-existing legislation to that provided for by the fourth part of this decree, the implementing provisions of art. 11 of legislative decree no. 95 of 27 January 1992, shall continue to apply until the date of entry into force of the corresponding implementing provisions provided for by the fourth part of this decree;
p) art. 19 of law no. 93 of 23 March 2001.
2. The Government, pursuant to art. 17, paragraph 2, of law no. 400 of 23 August 1988, shall adopt, within sixty days from the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, after the opinion of the competent Parliamentary Commissions, which shall express themselves within thirty days from the transmission of the relative draft to the Chambers, a specific regulation with which the further normative acts incompatible with the provisions of the fourth part of this decree are identified, which are repealed with effect from the date of entry into force of the same regulation.

**Art. 265**
**Transitional provisions**
1. The existing regulatory and technical standards that regulate the collection, transport, and disposal of waste remain in force until the adoption of the corresponding specific standards adopted in implementation of the fourth part of this decree. In order to ensure that there is no solution of continuity in the transition from the pre-existing legislation to that provided for by the fourth part of this decree, public administrations, in the exercise of their respective competences, shall adapt the pre-existing implementing legislation to the discipline contained in the fourth part of this decree, in compliance with what is established by article 264, paragraph 1, letter i). Any reference to toxic and harmful waste shall continue to be understood as referring to hazardous waste.
2. Pending the specific regulatory and technical standards on waste transport, as per article 195, paragraph 2, letter l), and without prejudice to the provisions of legislative decree no. 182 of 24 June 2003 on waste produced by ships and cargo residues, waste is assimilated to goods as regards the regulatory regime on transport by sea and the discipline of loading, unloading, transfer, deposit, and handling operations in port areas. In particular, hazardous waste is assimilated to dangerous goods.
3. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Education, University and Research and with the Minister of Production Activities, shall identify with a specific decree the forms of promotion and incentive for research and development of new remediation technologies at universities, as well as at companies and their consortia.
4. Without prejudice to the interventions carried out at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree, within one hundred and eighty days from that date, an adequate technical report may be submitted to the competent authority in order to reshape the already authorized remediation objectives on the basis of the criteria defined by the fourth part of this decree. The competent authority shall examine the documentation and arrange the necessary variations to the project.
5. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Minister of Production Activities, the methods, prerequisites, and economic effects are regulated for the hypothesis in which the subjects adhering to the existing consortia establish or adhere to new consortia or to alternative forms, in conformity with the model statute types approved by the same Ministers, without this resulting in new or greater burdens on public finance.
6. The steel and metallurgical companies operating at the date of entry into force of the fourth part of this decree and subject to the discipline of legislative decree no. 59 of 18 February 2005, are authorized on a transitional basis, upon presentation of the relative application, and until the release or final denial of the same authorization, to use, employing them in their production cycle, the ferrous scrap identified by code GA 430 of Annex II (green list of waste) of Regulation (EC) no. 259 of 1 February 1993 and the non-ferrous scrap identified by equivalent codes of the same Annex.

**Art. 266**
**Final provisions**
1. The sanitary facilities referred to in art. 4, paragraph 2, letter g), of law no. 847 of 29 September 1964, include the works, constructions, and plants intended for the disposal, recycling, or destruction of urban, special, hazardous, solid, and liquid waste, for the remediation of polluted areas.
2. The implementation of the provisions of the fourth part of this decree must not result in new or greater burdens or lower revenues for the State.
3. The expenses for the indemnity and for the economic treatment of the personnel of art. 9 of decree-law no. 397 of 9 September 1988, converted, with amendments, by law no. 475 of 9 November 1988, remain at the expense of the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, except as provided for in the following period. The economic treatment remains at the expense of the institutions of origin, upon agreement with the same, in the case where the personnel carries out activities of common interest.
4. Waste from maintenance or health care activities is considered produced at the headquarters or domicile of the subject who carries out such activities.
5. The provisions of articles 189, 190, 193, and 212 do not apply to the collection and transport activities of waste carried out by subjects authorized to carry out the same activities in an itinerant form, limited to the waste that is the object of their trade.
6. Without prejudice to the effects of the sanctioning measures adopted with final acts, from the date of publication of this decree, the provisions imposing the obligations of articles 48, paragraph 2, and 51, paragraph 6-ter, of legislative decree no. 22 of 5 February 1997, as well as the sanctioning provisions provided for by the same article 51, paragraphs 6-bis, 6-ter, and 6-quinquies, do not apply, also with reference to cases that occurred after 31 March 2004.
7. With a subsequent decree, adopted by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Ministers of Infrastructure and Transport, Production Activities, and Health, the discipline for the administrative simplification of the procedures relating to materials, including excavated earth and rocks, from small construction sites whose production does not exceed six thousand cubic meters of material, is dictated.

**PART FIVE - RULES ON AIR PROTECTION AND REDUCTION OF ATMOSPHERIC EMISSIONS**

**TITLE I - PREVENTION AND LIMITATION OF ATMOSPHERIC EMISSIONS FROM PLANTS AND ACTIVITIES**

**Art. 267**
**Scope of application**
1. This title, for the purposes of prevention and limitation of atmospheric pollution, applies to plants, including civil thermal plants not regulated by title II, and to activities that produce atmospheric emissions and establishes emission values, prescriptions, sampling and analysis methods for emissions, and criteria for the evaluation of the conformity of the measured values to the limit values.
2. Plants regulated by legislative decree no. 133 of 11 May 2005, implementing Directive 2000/76/EC on the incineration of waste, are excluded from the scope of application of the fifth part of this decree.
3. It remains established, for plants subject to integrated environmental authorization, what is provided for by legislative decree no. 59 of 18 February 2005; for such plants, the integrated environmental authorization replaces the authorization for emissions provided for by this title.
4. In order to allow the achievement of the objectives deriving from the Kyoto Protocol and to favor in any case the reduction of atmospheric emissions of polluting substances, the legislation of the fifth part of this decree intends to determine the implementation of all the most appropriate actions aimed at promoting the use of electricity produced by production plants powered by renewable sources pursuant to the community and national legislation in force and, in particular, of Directive 2001/77/EC and of legislative decree no. 387 of 29 December 2003, determining its priority dispatching. In particular:
a) measures aimed at favoring the production of electricity through renewable sources and at the same time developing the production base of clean technologies, with particular reference to Southern Italy, may be promoted by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities and for Development and Territorial Cohesion;
b) by decree of the Minister of Production Activities in concert with the Ministers of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and of Economy and Finance, to be issued within thirty days from the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, the fees of the members of the Observatory of art. 16 of legislative decree no. 387 of 29 December 2003 are determined, to be applied from the date of appointment, within the limits of the resources of article 16, paragraph 6, of the same legislative decree and without new or greater burdens on public finance;
c) the green certificates accrued for energy produced pursuant to art. 1, paragraph 71, of law no. 239 of 23 August 2004, may be used to fulfill the obligation of art. 11 of legislative decree no. 79 of 16 March 1999, only after all the green certificates accrued by the producers of electricity produced from renewable sources as defined by art. 2, paragraph 1, letter a), of legislative decree no. 387 of 2003 have been canceled;
d) in order to extend the validity period of the green certificates, in art. 20, paragraph 5, of legislative decree no. 387 of 29 December 2003, the words "eight years" are replaced by the words "twelve years".

**Art. 268**
**Definitions**
1. For the purposes of this title, the following definitions apply:
a) atmospheric pollution: any modification of the atmospheric air, due to the introduction into it of one or more substances in quantities and with characteristics such as to harm or constitute a danger to human health or to the quality of the environment or such as to harm material goods or compromise the legitimate uses of the environment;
b) emission: any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance introduced into the atmosphere that may cause atmospheric pollution;
c) channelled emission: emission of a gaseous effluent carried out through one or more specific points;
d) diffuse emission: emission other than that falling under letter c); for the activities of Article 275, diffuse emissions also include the solvents contained in the products, without prejudice to the different indications contained in Part III of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree;
e) technically channellable emission: diffuse emission that must be channelled on the basis of the best available techniques or in the presence of situations or zones that require particular protection;
f) total emissions: the sum of diffuse emissions and channelled emissions;
g) gaseous effluent: the gaseous discharge, containing solid, liquid, or gaseous emissions; its volumetric flow rate is expressed in cubic meters per hour reported to normal conditions (Nm3/hour), after deduction of the water vapor content, unless otherwise established by the fifth part of this decree;
h) plant: the machinery or system or the set of machinery or systems consisting of a fixed structure and having functional autonomy as it is intended for a specific activity; the specific activity for which the plant is intended may constitute the phase of a larger production cycle;
i) plant prior to 1988: a plant which, on 1 July 1988, was in operation or built in all its parts or authorized pursuant to the previous legislation;
l) plant prior to 2006: a plant that does not fall under the definition of letter i) and that, at the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, is authorized pursuant to the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988, provided that it is in operation or put into operation within the following twenty-four months; plants prior to 1988 whose authorization has been updated pursuant to art. 11 of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988 are also considered prior to 2006;
m) new plant: a plant that does not fall under the definitions of letters i) and l);
n) operator: the natural or legal person who has decision-making power over the installation or operation of the plant or, in the cases provided for by Article 269, paragraphs 10, 11, and 12, and by Article 275, the natural or legal person who has decision-making power over the exercise of the activity;
o) competent authority: the region or the autonomous province or the different authority indicated by regional law as the competent authority for the issuance of the authorization for emissions and for the adoption of the other measures provided for by this title; for off-shore platforms and for off-shore liquefied natural gas regasification terminals, the competent authority is the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory; for plants subject to integrated environmental authorization and for the fulfillments connected to it, the competent authority is the one that issues such authorization;
p) competent authority for control: the authority to which the regional law attributes the task of carrying out, on an ordinary basis, the checks regarding compliance with the authorization and the provisions of this title, without prejudice to the competences of the judicial police bodies; for plants subject to integrated environmental authorization and for the controls connected to it, the competent authority for control is that provided for by the legislation that regulates such authorization;
q) emission limit value: the emission factor, the concentration, the percentage, or the mass flow of polluting substances in the emissions that must not be exceeded;
r) emission factor: ratio between the mass of polluting substance emitted and a specific unit of measure of product or service;
s) concentration: ratio between the mass of polluting substance emitted and the volume of the gaseous effluent; for combustion plants, the emission values expressed as concentration (mg/Nm3) are calculated considering, unless otherwise established by the fifth part of this decree, a reference volumetric oxygen content of 3 percent by volume of the gaseous effluent for liquid and gaseous fuels, of 6 percent by volume for solid fuels, and of 15 percent by volume for gas turbines;
t) percentage: ratio between the mass of polluting substance emitted and the mass of the same substance used in the production process, multiplied by one hundred;
u) mass flow: mass of polluting substance emitted per unit of time;
v) emission relevance threshold: mass flow, for a single pollutant, measured upstream of any abatement systems, and in the most severe operating conditions of the plant, below which the emission limit values do not apply;
z) normal conditions: a temperature of 273.15 K and a pressure of 101.3 kPa;
aa) best available techniques: the most efficient and advanced stage in the development of activities and their methods of operation which indicate the practical suitability of particular techniques for providing in principle the basis for emission limit values and other permit conditions designed to prevent and, where that is not practicable, to reduce emissions; for this purpose, it is understood by:
1) techniques: both the technology used and the way in which the installation is designed, built, maintained, operated, and decommissioned;
2) available: techniques developed on a scale which allows implementation in the relevant industrial sector, under economically and technically viable conditions, taking into consideration the costs and advantages, whether or not the techniques are used or produced in the national territory, as long as they are reasonably accessible to the operator;
3) best: the most effective in achieving a high general level of protection of the environment as a whole;
bb) start-up period: unless otherwise provided for in the authorization, the time in which the plant, following the supply of energy, fuels, or materials, is brought from a condition in which it does not carry out the activity for which it is intended, or carries it out in a process load situation lower than the technical minimum, to a condition in which this activity is carried out in a process load situation equal to or greater than the technical minimum;
cc) shutdown period: unless otherwise provided for in the authorization, the time in which the plant, following the interruption of the supply of energy, fuels, or materials, not due to a malfunction, is brought from a condition in which it carries out the activity for which it is intended in a process load situation equal to or greater than the technical minimum to a condition in which this function is carried out in a process load situation lower than the technical minimum or is not carried out;
dd) process load: the percentage level of production with respect to the nominal capacity of the plant;
ee) technical minimum: the minimum process load compatible with the operation of the plant in a steady state;
ff) combustion plant: any technical apparatus in which fuels are oxidized in order to use the heat thus produced;
gg) large combustion plant: a combustion plant with a rated thermal input of not less than 50 MW;
hh) rated thermal input of the combustion plant: the product of the lower calorific value of the fuel used and the maximum flow rate of fuel burned at the single combustion plant, as declared by the manufacturer, expressed in thermal watts or its multiples;
ii) organic compound: any compound containing at least the element carbon and one or more of the following elements: hydrogen, halogens, oxygen, sulfur, phosphorus, silicon, or nitrogen, with the exception of carbon oxides and inorganic carbonates and bicarbonates;
ll) volatile organic compound (VOC): any organic compound having at 293.15 K a vapor pressure of 0.01 kPa or more, or having a corresponding volatility under particular conditions of use. For the purposes of the fifth part of this decree, the fraction of creosote which at a temperature of 293.15 K has a vapor pressure greater than 0.01 kPa is considered as a VOC;
mm) organic solvent: any VOC used alone or in combination with other agents for the purpose of dissolving raw materials, products, or waste, without undergoing chemical transformations, or used as a cleaning agent to dissolve contaminants or as a solvent, a dispersion medium, a viscosity adjuster, a surface tension adjuster, a plasticizer, or a preservative;
nn) nominal capacity: the maximum daily mass of organic solvents used for the activities of Article 275, carried out under normal operating conditions and as a function of the product capacity for which the activities are designed;
oo) solvent consumption: the total quantity of organic solvents used for the activities of Article 275 per civil year or for any other twelve-month period, minus any VOC recovered for reuse;
pp) maximum theoretical solvent consumption: the solvent consumption calculated on the basis of the nominal capacity referred to, unless otherwise established by the authorization, for three hundred and thirty days per year in the case of continuous cycle activities and two hundred and twenty days per year for other activities;
qq) reuse of organic solvents: the use of organic solvents produced by an activity and subsequently recovered for the purpose of being used by the same for any technical or commercial purpose, including use as a fuel;
rr) consumption threshold: the solvent consumption expressed in tons/year established by Part II of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree, for the activities provided therein;
ss) refineries: mineral oil refineries subject to authorization pursuant to law no. 239 of 23 August 2004;
tt) fuel distribution plants: plants where fuel is dispensed to the tanks of motor vehicles from storage plants;
uu) petrol: any petroleum derivative, with or without additives, corresponding to the following customs codes: NC 2710 1131 - 2710 1141 - 2710 1145 - 2710 1149 - 2710 1151 - 2710 1159 or having a Reid vapor pressure of 27.6 kilopascals or more, ready for use as fuel for motor vehicles, with the exception of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG);
vv) terminal: any structure used for loading and unloading petrol into/from a road tanker, rail tanker, or ship tanker, including the storage plants present at the site of the structure;
zz) storage plant: any fixed tank used for the storage of fuel;
aaa) loading plant: any plant at a terminal where petrol can be loaded into mobile tanks. Loading plants for road tankers include one or more loading gantries;
bbb) loading gantry: any structure at a terminal by which petrol can, at any given time, be loaded into a single road tanker;
ccc) temporary vapor storage: the temporary storage of vapors in a fixed-roof storage plant at a terminal before transfer and subsequent recovery at another terminal. The transfer of vapors from one storage plant to another at the same terminal is not considered temporary vapor storage for the purposes of the fifth part of this decree;
ddd) mobile tank: a tank with a capacity greater than 1 m3, transported by road, by rail, or by navigable waterway and used for the transfer of petrol from one terminal to another or from a terminal to a fuel distribution plant;
eee) road tanker: a vehicle used for the road transport of petrol which includes one or more permanently mounted tanks or tanks forming an integral part of the chassis or one or more removable tanks.

**Art. 269**
**Authorization for atmospheric emissions**
1. Without prejudice to what is established by Article 267, paragraph 3, by paragraphs 14 and 16 of this article, and by Article 272, paragraph 5, for all plants that produce emissions, an authorization must be requested pursuant to the fifth part of this decree.
2. The operator who intends to install a new plant or transfer a plant from one location to another shall submit an authorization application to the competent authority, accompanied by:
a) the project of the plant in which the specific activity for which the plant is intended is described, the techniques adopted to limit the emissions and the quantity and quality of such emissions, the operating methods and the quantity, type, and product characteristics of the fuels intended for use, as well as, for plants subject to this condition, the technical minimum defined through the plant parameters that characterize it, and
b) by a technical report describing the overall production cycle in which the specific activity for which the plant is intended is inserted and indicating the period foreseen between commissioning and reaching full operational capacity.
3. For the purpose of issuing the authorization, the competent authority shall convene, within thirty days of receiving the request, a services conference pursuant to Articles 14 and following of Law no. 241 of 7 August 1990, during which a simultaneous examination of the interests involved in other administrative proceedings is also carried out, in particular, in the proceedings conducted by the municipality pursuant to the decree of the President of the Republic no. 380 of 6 June 2001, and the royal decree no. 1265 of 27 July 1934. Any integrations of the application must be transmitted to the competent authority within thirty days of the request; if the competent authority does not decide within a period of one hundred and twenty days or, in case of integration of the authorization application, within one hundred and fifty days of receiving the application itself, the operator may, within the following sixty days, request the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory to provide, notifying this request also to the competent authority. The Minister shall decide on the request, in concert with the Ministers of Health and of Production Activities, after consulting the interested municipality, within ninety days or, in the cases provided for by Article 281, paragraph 1, within one hundred and fifty days of receiving it; once this term has elapsed, art. 2, paragraph 5, of Law no. 241 of 7 August 1990 shall apply.
4. The authorization shall establish, pursuant to Articles 270 and 271:
a) for emissions that are technically channellable, the methods of capture and channelling;
b) for channelled emissions or for which channelling has been ordered, the emission limit values, the prescriptions, the sampling and analysis methods, the criteria for evaluating the conformity of the measured values to the limit values, and the frequency of the controls under the operator's responsibility;
c) for diffuse emissions, specific prescriptions aimed at ensuring their containment.
5. The authorization shall establish the period that must elapse between the commissioning and the reaching of full operational capacity of the plant. The commissioning must be communicated to the competent authority at least fifteen days in advance. The authorization shall establish the date by which the data relating to the emissions made in a continuous period of controlled operation of a duration not less than ten days, starting from the reaching of full operational capacity, and the duration of this period, as well as the number of samplings to be carried out, must be communicated to the competent authority.
6. The competent authority for control shall carry out the first check on compliance with the authorization within six months of the date of reaching full operational capacity of the plant.
7. The authorization issued pursuant to this article has a duration of fifteen years. The renewal application must be submitted at least one year before the expiry date.
In the absence of a decision on the renewal application for the authorization issued pursuant to this article, the operation of the plant may continue even after the expiry of the authorization if the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory has been requested to provide for it pursuant to paragraph 3, and has not yet made a decision. The updating of the authorization pursuant to paragraph 8 entails the start of a new fifteen-year period only in the case of a substantial modification.
8. The operator who intends to subject a plant to a modification, which involves a variation of what is indicated in the project or in the technical report of paragraph 2 in the authorization of paragraph 3 or in the authorization issued pursuant to the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988, or in the documents provided for by art. 12 of that decree, including those relating to the operating methods or the fuels used, shall notify the competent authority or, if the modification is substantial, shall submit an application for updating pursuant to this article. If the modification for which communication has been given is substantial, the competent authority shall order the operator to submit an application for updating the authorization, to which the provisions of this article apply. If the modification is not substantial, the competent authority shall, where necessary, update the existing authorization. If the competent authority does not express itself within sixty days, the operator may proceed with the execution of the non-substantial communicated modification, without prejudice to the power of the competent authority to provide for it subsequently, within six months of receiving the communication. A substantial modification is intended as one that involves an increase or a qualitative variation of the emissions or that alters the technical conditions for their channelling. This paragraph also applies to those who intend to modify an activity authorized pursuant to paragraphs 10, 11, 12, and 13. What is provided for by Article 275, paragraph 11, remains unaffected.
9. The competent authority for control is authorized to carry out at the plants all the inspections it deems necessary to ascertain compliance with the authorization.
10. Without prejudice to what is provided for by Article 275, whoever intends to carry out, in a non-occasional manner, painting activities in a place adapted for this purpose and in the absence of a plant shall submit a specific application to the competent authority, unless the activity falls among those provided for by Article 272, paragraph 1. The competent authority shall evaluate whether, pursuant to Article 270, paragraphs 1 and 2, the emissions produced by such activities must be channelled through the creation of a plant.
11. In the case where the channelling of emissions is ordered pursuant to paragraph 10, the limit values and prescriptions of Article 271, contained in the authorizations issued in accordance with this article, shall apply, or, if the activity falls among those provided for by Article 272, paragraph 2, the limit values and prescriptions contained in the general authorizations regulated therein shall apply. In the case where the channelling of emissions is not ordered, the authorization shall establish specific prescriptions aimed at ensuring the containment of the diffuse emissions produced by the activity; the provisions of this article, excluding those that may refer only to channelled emissions, shall apply to such authorization.
12. The provisions of paragraphs 10 and 11 also apply to whoever intends to carry out, in a non-occasional manner and in a place adapted for this purpose, in the absence of a plant, activities of processing, transformation, or conservation of agricultural materials, which produce emissions, or activities of production, manipulation, transport, loading, unloading, or storage of dusty materials, unless such activities fall among those provided for by Article 272, paragraph 1. For activities involving dusty materials, the norms of Part I of Annex V to the fifth part of this decree shall apply.
13. If a place is adapted, in the absence of a fixed structure, for the non-occasional exercise of the activities provided for in paragraphs 10 or 12, carried out therein on an occasional basis by multiple subjects, the authorization is requested by the manager of the place. For the purposes of this paragraph, manager means the subject who exercises decision-making power over the methods and conditions of use of that area by whoever carries out the activity.
14. The following plants are not subject to authorization:
a) combustion plants, including cogeneration generator sets, with a nominal thermal input of less than 1 MW, powered by biomass as per Annex X to the fifth part of this decree, by diesel oil, as such or in emulsion, or by biodiesel;
b) combustion plants powered by fuel oil, as such or in emulsion, with a nominal thermal input of less than 0.3 MW;
c) combustion plants powered by methane or LPG, with a nominal thermal input of less than 3 MW;
d) combustion plants, located within waste disposal plants, powered by landfill gas, residual gases from purification processes, and biogas, with a nominal thermal input not exceeding 3 MW, if the recovery activity is subject to the simplified authorization procedures provided for by the fourth part of this decree and such procedures have been completed;
e) combustion plants powered by biogas as per Annex X to the fifth part of this decree, with a total nominal thermal input of less than or equal to 3 MW;
f) cogeneration generator sets powered by methane or LPG, with a nominal thermal input of less than 3 MW;
g) cogeneration generator sets powered by petrol with a nominal thermal input of less than 1 MW;
h) combustion plants connected to the storage activities of petroleum products operating for less than 2200 hours per year, with a nominal thermal input of less than 5 MW if powered by methane or LPG and less than 2.5 MW if powered by diesel;
i) emergency and safety plants, analysis and research laboratories, pilot plants for tests, research, experimentation, identification of prototypes. This exemption does not apply in the case of emission of carcinogenic, toxic for reproduction or mutagenic substances or substances of particularly high toxicity and cumulativeness, as identified by Part II of Annex I to the fifth part of this decree.
15. The competent authority may provide, with its own general measure, that the operators of the plants of paragraph 14 shall communicate to the same, in advance, the date of commissioning of the plant or the start of the activity.
16. The storage plants for mineral oils, including liquefied gases, are not subject to authorization. The operators are in any case required to adopt appropriate measures to contain diffuse emissions and to respect any further prescriptions possibly ordered, for the same purposes, with a specific measure by the competent authority.

**Art. 270**
**Channelling of emissions**
1. In the authorization phase, the competent authority shall verify if the diffuse emissions of a plant or of a fixed machine with functional autonomy are technically channellable on the basis of the best available techniques and on the basis of the relevant prescriptions of Annex I to the fifth part of this decree and, in this case, shall order their capture and channelling.
2. In the presence of particular situations of health risk or zones that require particular environmental protection, the competent authority shall order the capture and channelling of diffuse emissions pursuant to paragraph 1 even if the identified technique does not satisfy the availability requirement of Article 268, paragraph 1, letter aa), number 2).
3. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities and of Health, the criteria to be used for the verification of paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be established.
4. If multiple plants with similar technical and constructive characteristics, having emissions with homogeneous chemical-physical characteristics and located in the same place, are intended for specific identical activities, the competent authority, taking into account the technical and economic conditions, may consider them as a single plant.
5. In the case of channelled emissions or for which channelling has been ordered, each plant or fixed machine with functional autonomy, also identified pursuant to paragraph 4, must have a single emission point, without prejudice to what is provided for in paragraphs 6 and 7. Unless otherwise provided for by other provisions of this title, the emission limit values apply to each emission point.
6. Where it is not technically possible to ensure compliance with paragraph 5, the competent authority may authorize a new plant or fixed machine with functional autonomy having multiple emission points. In this case, the emission limit values expressed as mass flow, emission factor, and percentage refer to the complex of emissions of the plant or of the fixed machine with functional autonomy, and those expressed as concentration refer to the emissions of the single points, without prejudice to the application of Article 271, paragraph 10.
7. Where it is not technically possible to ensure compliance with paragraph 5, the competent authority may authorize the channelling of the emissions of multiple new plants or fixed machines with functional autonomy into one or more common emission points, also belonging to plants prior to 2006 and 1988, provided that the emissions of all the plants or of all the fixed machines with functional autonomy present homogeneous chemical-physical characteristics. In this case, the most severe of the emission limit values expressed as concentration provided for the single plants or fixed machines with functional autonomy applies to each common emission point.
8. The plants prior to 2006 and 1988 shall adapt to what is provided for in paragraph 5 or, where this is not technically possible, to what is provided for in paragraphs 6 and 7 within three years following the first renewal of the authorization carried out pursuant to Article 281, paragraph 1. For the purposes of the application of paragraphs 4, 5, 6, and 7, the competent authority shall also take into account the documentation prepared by the commission of Article 281, paragraph 9.

**Art. 271**
**Emission limit values and prescriptions**
1. Annex I to the fifth part of this decree establishes the emission limit values, with the indication of a maximum value and a minimum value, and the prescriptions for the operation of plants prior to 1988 and of all the plants of Article 269, paragraph 14, except for those of letter d). The emission limit values and the prescriptions established in Annex I apply to new plants and to plants prior to 2006 exclusively in the cases expressly provided for by that Annex. Annex V to the fifth part of this decree establishes specific prescriptions for the emissions of dust from activities of production, manipulation, transport, loading, unloading, or storage of dusty materials and for the emissions in the form of gas or vapor deriving from activities of processing, transport, transfer, and storage of liquid organic substances.
2. With a specific decree, adopted pursuant to Article 281, paragraph 5, Annex I to the fifth part of this decree shall be integrated with the setting of limit values and prescriptions for the operation of new plants and those prior to 2006. With this decree, the same Annex I is also updated. Until the adoption of this decree, the methods previously in use shall apply for plants prior to 1988 and 2006, and for new plants, the methods established by the competent authority on the basis of the relevant CEN technical standards or, where these are not available, of the relevant ISO technical standards, or, where these are also not available, on the basis of the relevant national or international technical standards.
3. The region or the autonomous province may establish, by law or by general provision, on the basis of the best available techniques, emission limit values between the minimum and maximum values set by Annex I to the fifth part of this decree. The region or the autonomous province may also establish, for the purposes of evaluating the extent of the dilution of emissions, characteristic flow rates for specific types of plants.
4. The plans and programs provided for by art. 8 of legislative decree no. 351 of 4 August 1999, and by art. 3 of legislative decree no. 183 of 21 May 2004, may establish emission limit values and prescriptions, also concerning the construction or operating conditions of the plant, more severe than those set by Annex I to the fifth part of this decree and by the legislation of paragraph 3, provided that this is necessary for the achievement of the limit values and target values of air quality. Until the issuance of such plans and programs, the emission limit values and the prescriptions contained in the plans adopted pursuant to art. 4 of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988 shall continue to apply.
5. The plans and programs of paragraph 4 may establish emission limit values and prescriptions for new plants or plants prior to 2006 even before the adoption of the decree of paragraph 2.
6. For each of the plants for which the application of Article 269 is submitted, the authorization establishes the emission limit values and the prescriptions on the basis of the values and prescriptions set by Annex I to the fifth part of this decree, by the legislation of paragraph 3, and by the plans and programs relating to air quality. The prescriptions aimed at ensuring the containment of diffuse emissions are established on the basis of the best available techniques and on the basis of the relevant provisions of Annexes I and V to the fifth part of this decree. For substances for which emission values are not set, the authorization establishes specific limit values with reference to those provided for similar substances in terms of chemistry and having similar effects on health and the environment.
7. In the case where the legislation of paragraph 3 and the plans and programs relating to air quality do not establish emission limit values, the maximum value established by Annex I to the fifth part of this decree must not in any case be exceeded in the authorization.
8. For new plants or for plants prior to 2006, until the adoption of the decree of paragraph 2, the authorization establishes the emission limit values and the prescriptions on the basis of the values and prescriptions set in the plans and programs of paragraph 5 and on the basis of the best available techniques. In the authorization, the minimum emission values that Annex I sets for plants prior to 1988 must not in any case be exceeded. The prescriptions aimed at ensuring the containment of diffuse emissions are established on the basis of the best available techniques and of Annex V to the fifth part of this decree. The last period of paragraph 6 applies.
9. Without prejudice to what is provided for in paragraph 8, the authorization may establish emission limit values more severe than those set by Annex I to the fifth part of this decree, by the legislation of paragraph 3, and by the plans and programs relating to air quality:
a) upon renewal, on the basis of the best available techniques, also taking into account the relationship between the costs and the overall benefits;
b) for zones of particular natural value, identified within the plans and programs adopted pursuant to Articles 8 and 9 of legislative decree no. 351 of 4 August 1999, or of art. 3 of legislative decree no. 183 of 21 May 2004, or of art. 4 of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988.
10. In the case provided for by Article 270, paragraph 6, the authorization may provide that the emission limit values refer to the weighted average of the emissions of polluting substances that are equal or belong to the same class and have homogeneous chemical characteristics, coming from the different emission points of the plant. The total mass flow of the plant must not be greater than what it would be if the emission limit values were applied to the single emission points.
11. The emission limit values and the reference volumetric oxygen content refer to the volume of gaseous effluent reported to normal conditions, after deduction, unless otherwise indicated in Annex I to the fifth part of this decree, of the volumetric content of water vapor.
12. Unless otherwise indicated in Annex I to the fifth part of this decree, the reference volumetric oxygen content is that deriving from the process. If in the emission the volumetric oxygen content is different from the reference one, the measured concentrations must be corrected using the following formula:
E = EM * (21 - O2) / (21 - O2M)
where:
EM = measured concentration
E = concentration
O2 M = measured oxygen content
O2 = reference oxygen content
13. The emission limit values refer to the quantity of emission diluted to the extent that is unavoidable from a technological and operational point of view. In case of further dilution of the emission, the measured concentrations must be corrected using the following formula:
E = EM * PM / P
where:
PM = measured flow rate
EM = measured concentration
P = flow rate of gaseous effluent diluted to the extent that is unavoidable from a technological and operational point of view
E = concentration referred to P
14. Unless otherwise established by the fifth part of this decree, the emission limit values apply to periods of normal operation of the plant, understood as the periods in which the plant is in operation, excluding the start-up and shutdown periods and the periods in which malfunctions occur such as not to allow compliance with the values themselves. The authorization may establish specific prescriptions for these start-up and shutdown periods and for the eventuality of such malfunctions and identify further transitional periods in which the emission limit values do not apply. If a malfunction occurs such as not to allow compliance with emission limit values, the competent authority must be informed within the following eight hours and may order the reduction or cessation of activities or other prescriptions, without prejudice to the obligation of the operator to proceed with the functional restoration of the plant in the shortest possible time. The operator is in any case required to take all appropriate precautions to minimize emissions during the start-up and shutdown phases. Periods of oscillation that occur regularly in the performance of the plant's function do not in any case constitute start-up or shutdown periods.
15. For the large combustion plants of Article 273 and for the plants of Article 275, this article applies with reference to the emission limit values provided therein.
16. For plants subject to integrated environmental authorization, the limit values and prescriptions of this article apply for the purpose of issuing such authorization, without prejudice to the power of the competent authority to establish more severe limit values and prescriptions.
17. Annex VI to the fifth part of this decree establishes the criteria for evaluating the conformity of the measured values to the emission limit values. With a specific decree pursuant to Article 281, paragraph 5, the aforesaid Annex VI shall be integrated, providing for specific sampling and analysis methods for emissions as well as methods capable of guaranteeing the quality of the continuous emission monitoring systems. Until the adoption of such decree, the methods previously in use shall apply for plants prior to 1988 and 2006, and for new plants, the methods established by the competent authority on the basis of the relevant CEN technical standards or, where these are not available, of the relevant ISO technical standards, or, where these are also not available, on the basis of the relevant national or international technical standards.

**Art. 272**
**Plants and activities under derogation**
1. The competent authority may provide, with its own general measure, that the operators of the plants or activities listed in Part I of Annex IV to the fifth part of this decree shall communicate to the same that they fall within this list and, in advance, the date of commissioning of the plant or the start of the activity, unless otherwise provided for by the same Annex. The aforesaid list, referring to plants or activities whose emissions are scarcely relevant for the purposes of atmospheric pollution, may be updated and integrated as provided for by Article 281, paragraph 5, also on the proposal of the regions, the autonomous provinces, and the representative associations of productive categories.
2. For specific categories of plants, identified in relation to the type and methods of production, the competent authority may adopt specific general authorizations, for each single category of plants, in which the emission limit values, the prescriptions, the adaptation times, the sampling and analysis methods, and the frequency of the controls are established. The emission limit values and the prescriptions are established in accordance with Article 271, paragraphs 6 and 8. The competent authority must in any case proceed with the adoption of such general authorizations, within two years from the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, for the plants and activities of Part II of Annex IV to the fifth part of this decree. In case of failure to adopt the general authorization, within the prescribed term, the same is issued with a specific decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the operators of the interested plants communicate their adhesion to the competent authority; the power of this authority to subsequently adopt new general authorizations, the adhesion to which entails, for the interested subject, the lapse of that adopted by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, is without prejudice. The operators of the plants for which a general authorization has been adopted may in any case submit an authorization application pursuant to Article 269.
3. The operator of the plants or activities of paragraph 2 shall submit to the competent authority, at least forty-five days before the installation of the plant or the start of the activity, an application for adhesion to the general authorization. The competent authority may, with its own measure, deny the adhesion in the case where the requirements provided for by the general authorization are not respected or in the presence of particular situations of health risk or zones that require particular environmental protection. The general authorization establishes the requirements of the application for adhesion and may provide, for the plants and activities of Part II of Annex IV to the fifth part of this decree, specific simplified application models, in which the quantities and qualities of the emissions are deductible from the quantities of raw and auxiliary materials used. The competent authority shall proceed, every fifteen years, to the renewal of the general authorizations adopted pursuant to this article. For the general authorizations issued pursuant to the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 21 July 1989 and the decree of the President of the Republic of 25 July 1991, the first renewal is carried out within fifteen years from the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree or, if such authorizations are not compliant with the provisions of this title, within one year from the same date. In all cases of renewal, the operation of the plant or activity may continue if the operator, within sixty days of the adoption of the new general authorization, submits an application for adhesion accompanied, where necessary, by an adaptation project and if the competent authority does not deny the adhesion. In case of failure to submit the application within the foreseen term, the plant or activity is considered in operation without authorization for emissions.
4. The provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 do not apply:
a) in the case of emission of carcinogenic, toxic for reproduction, or mutagenic substances or of substances of particularly high toxicity and cumulativeness, as identified by Part II of Annex I to the fifth part of this decree, or
b) in the case where the substances or preparations classified by legislative decree no. 52 of 3 February 1997, as carcinogenic, mutagenic, or toxic for reproduction, due to their VOC content, and to which risk phrases R45, R46, R49, R60, R61 have been assigned, are used in the plant or in the activity.
5. This title, with the exception of what is provided for in paragraph 1, does not apply to the plants and activities listed in Part I of Annex IV to the fifth part of this decree. This title also does not apply to plants intended for national defense nor to emissions from vents and air changes exclusively used for the protection and safety of work environments. The relevant provisions of Articles 276 and 277 apply exclusively to fuel distribution plants.

**Art. 273**
**Large combustion plants**
1. Annex II to the fifth part of this decree establishes, in relation to large combustion plants, the emission limit values, including those for multi-fuel plants, the methods for monitoring and controlling emissions, the criteria for verifying compliance with the limit values, and the hypotheses of abnormal operation or malfunction of the plants.
2. The emission limit values of Part II, sections 1 to 5, letter B, and section 6 of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree apply to new large combustion plants.
3. The emission limit values of Part II, sections 1 to 5, letter A, and section 6 of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree apply to large combustion plants prior to 2006 starting from 1 January 2008. Until that date, Articles 3, paragraph 1, 6, paragraph 2, and 14, comma 3, nonch gli Allegati 4, 5, 6 e 9 del decreto del Ministro dell'ambiente 8 maggio 1989. Sono fatti salvi i diversi termini previsti nel suddetto Allegato II.
4. Ai grandi impianti di combustione anteriori al 1988 i valori limite di emissione di cui alla parte II, sezioni da 1 a 5, lettera A, e sezioni 6 e 7 dell'Allegato II alla parte quinta del presente decreto si applicano a partire dal 1 gennaio 2008. Fino a tale data si applicano i valori limite di emissione per il biossido di zolfo, gli ossidi di azoto, le polveri e per i metalli e loro composti previsti dal decreto del Ministro dell'ambiente 12 luglio 1990, o contenuti nelle autorizzazioni rilasciate ai sensi del decreto del Presidente della

---
Republic of May 24, 1988, no. 203, as well as the prescriptions relating to the anomalies of the abatement plants established in Annex II, part A, letter E, of the same ministerial decree. Until that date, the maximums and the emission reduction objectives, set in part V of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree, also apply. The different terms provided for in that Annex II are without prejudice.
5. The operators of the large combustion plants referred to in paragraph 4 may be exempted from the obligation to observe the emission limit values provided for in part II, sections 1 to 5, letter A, and section 6 of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree, on the basis of the procedure governed by part I of the same Annex II.
6. For the purposes of adapting the plants referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 to the emission limit values provided for therein, the operator, within the scope of the request for integrated environmental authorization, shall present to the competent authority a technical report containing the description of the plant, the technologies adopted to prevent pollution, and the quality and quantity of the emissions, from which compliance with the prescriptions of this title results, or an adaptation project aimed at respecting the same.
7. For plants with a nominal thermal power of 50 MW, the technical report or the adaptation project referred to in paragraph 6 must be submitted by August 1, 2007 and, in case of approval, the competent authority shall, pursuant to Article 269, update the existing authorizations.
8. In addition to what is provided for in Article 271, paragraph 14, the emission limit values do not apply to large combustion plants in cases of abnormal operation provided for in part I of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree, in compliance with the conditions provided therein.
9. In the event that the competent authority, when issuing the authorization, considers that two or more combustion plants, new or prior to 2006, also with a nominal thermal power of less than 50 MW, are installed at the same time and in such a way that the gaseous effluents, taking into account the technical and economic conditions, can be channelled towards a single chimney, the same considers the set of these new plants as a single plant whose nominal thermal power is equal to the sum of the nominal thermal powers of these plants. This provision applies only if the sum of the thermal powers is greater than or equal to 50 MW.
10. If a combustion plant is expanded with the construction of an additional plant having a nominal thermal power of 50 MW or more, to this additional plant, excluding the cases provided for in part I, paragraph 3, points 3.3 and 3.4, of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree, the emission limit values established in the same Annex II, sections 1 to 5, letter B, apply, as a function of the total thermal power of the two plants.
11. In the case where a large combustion plant is subject to modifications qualified as substantial by the current legislation on integrated environmental authorization, the emission limit values established in part II, sections 1 to 5, letter B, and section 6 of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree apply.
12. Without prejudice to what is provided for by the current legislation on integrated environmental authorization, for new plants or in the case of modifications pursuant to paragraph 11, the authorization application must be accompanied by a specific study concerning the technical and economic feasibility of the combined generation of heat and electricity. In the case where this feasibility is ascertained, also in light of elements other than those contained in the study, the competent authority, taking into account the market and distribution situation, shall condition the issuance of the authorization measure to the immediate or deferred realization of this solution.
13. After January 1, 2008, for combustion plants with a nominal thermal power of less than 50MW and for other plants excluded from the scope of application of the fifth part of this decree, which are part of a refinery, the emission limit values of part IV, paragraph 1, of Annex I to the fifth part of this decree shall continue to apply, without prejudice to what is provided for by the current legislation on integrated environmental authorization, calculated as a weighted ratio between the sum of the masses of pollutants emitted and the sum of the emission volumes of all the refinery's plants, including those falling within the scope of application of this article.
14. In case of realization of large combustion plants that could cause significant prejudice to the environment of another Member State of the European Community, the competent authority shall inform the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory for

---
the fulfillment of the obligations of the convention on the assessment of environmental impact in a transboundary context, stipulated in Espoo on 25 February 1991, ratified by law no. 640 of 3 November 1994.
15. The provisions of this article apply to combustion plants intended for the production of energy, with the exception of those that directly use the products of combustion in manufacturing processes. The following are particularly excluded:
a) plants in which the products of combustion are used for direct heating, drying, or any other treatment of objects or materials, such as reheating furnaces or heat treatment furnaces;
b) post-combustion plants, i.e., any technical device for the purification of gaseous effluent by combustion, which is not operated as an independent combustion plant;
c) catalytic cracking catalyst regeneration devices;
d) hydrogen sulfide to sulfur conversion devices;
e) reactors used in the chemical industry;
f) batteries of coke ovens;
g) cowpers of blast furnaces;
h) any technical device used for the propulsion of a vehicle, a ship, or an aircraft;
i) gas turbines used on off-shore platforms and on off-shore liquefied natural gas regasification plants;
l) gas turbines authorized before the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, without prejudice to the provisions expressly referring to them;
m) plants powered by diesel, petrol, or gas engines.

**Art. 274**
**Collection and transmission of data on emissions from large combustion plants**
1. The Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall transmit to the European Commission, every three years, a report concerning the emissions of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and dust from all large combustion plants referred to in the fifth part of this decree, in which the emissions of the refineries are separately indicated. This report is transmitted for the first time by 31 December 2007 in relation to the three-year period that begins on 1 January 2004 and, subsequently, within twelve months of the end of each subsequent three-year period under examination. The Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall also transmit to the European Commission, upon request, the annual data relating to the emissions of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and dust from the individual combustion plants.
2. Starting from 1 January 2008, the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall submit a report to the European Commission each year concerning the plants prior to 1988 for which the exemption provided for in Article 273, paragraph 5, has been granted, indicating the used and unused times that have been authorized for the remaining operating period of the plants. To this end, the competent authority, if different from the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, shall communicate to this Ministry the aforementioned exemptions at the same time as they are granted.
3. The Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall submit a report to the European Commission each year regarding the cases in which the derogations of part II, sections 1 and 4, letter A, paragraph 2, of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree are applied, and the derogations of the notes of letters A and B of the same Annex II, part II, section 1. To this end, the competent authority, if different from the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, shall communicate to this Ministry the aforementioned derogations at the same time as their application.
4. By 31 May of each year, starting from 2006, the operators of large combustion plants shall communicate to the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), with the methods provided for in part III of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree, the total emissions, relating to the previous year, of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and dust, determined in accordance with the prescriptions of part IV of Annex II to the fifth part of this decree, as well as the total annual quantity of energy produced respectively from biomass, from other solid fuels, from liquid fuels, from natural gas, and from other gases, referred to the net calorific value, and the characterization of the emission abatement systems. In case of failure to

---
communication of the data and information referred to in this paragraph, the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, also for the purposes of what is provided for by art. 650 of the penal code, shall order the non-compliant operator to comply.
5. The Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), on the basis of the information referred to in paragraph 4, shall prepare a report in which the emissions of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and dust from all large combustion plants referred to in the fifth part of this decree are reported. This report must indicate the total annual emissions of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and dust, and the total annual quantity of energy produced respectively from biomass, from other solid fuels, from liquid fuels, from natural gas, and from other gases, referred to the net calorific value. At least two months before the deadline provided for in paragraph 1 for the transmission of the data to the European Commission, the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) shall transmit to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory the aforementioned report, as well as the disaggregated data relating to each plant.
6. The data referred to in paragraph 4 shall be collected and sent in electronic format. To this end, the procedures indicated on the website of the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, where available, must be observed. The report referred to in paragraph 5, as well as the disaggregated data collected by the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) shall be made available to the competent authorities on the website of the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory.

**Art. 275**
**VOC emissions**
1. Annex III to the fifth part of this decree establishes, with regard to volatile organic compound emissions, the emission limit values, the methods for monitoring and controlling emissions, the criteria for evaluating the conformity of the measured values to the limit values, and the methods for preparing the solvent management plan.
2. If in the same place one or more activities identified in part II of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree, which individually exceed the solvent consumption thresholds established therein, are carried out by means of one or more plants or machinery and non-fixed systems or manual operations, the limit values for channelled emissions and for diffuse emissions of the same Annex III, part III, or the total emission limit values of that Annex III, parts III and IV, as well as the prescriptions provided therein, shall apply to each of these activities. This provision also applies to activities which, in the same place, are directly and technically connected to the activities identified in the aforementioned Annex III, part II, and which may influence VOC emissions. The exceedance of the solvent consumption thresholds is evaluated with reference to the maximum theoretical solvent consumption authorized. The activities referred to in part II of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree include the cleaning of equipment and do not include the cleaning of products, without prejudice to the different provisions provided therein.
3. For the purposes of what is provided for in paragraph 2, the limit values for channelled emissions apply to each plant that produces such emissions, and the limit values for diffuse emissions apply to the sum of the non-channelled emissions of all the plants, of all the machinery and non-fixed systems, and of all the operations.
4. The operator who intends to carry out the activities referred to in paragraph 2 shall submit to the competent authority an authorization application in accordance with what is provided for in part I of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree. For this purpose, Article 269 shall apply, with the exception of paragraphs 2 and 4. In addition to the cases provided for by Article 269, paragraph 8, the authorization application must also be submitted by the operator of the activities who, as a result of a modification of the maximum theoretical solvent consumption, falls within those of paragraph 2.
5. The authorization covers the plants, machinery and non-fixed systems, and manual operations that carry out the activities of paragraph 2 and establishes, on the basis of that paragraph, the limit values that must be respected. Article 270 applies for capture and channelling. For emissions produced by machinery and non-fixed systems or by manual operations, paragraphs 10, 11, and 13 of Article 269 apply.
6. The authorization indicates the maximum theoretical solvent consumption and the total annual emission resulting from the application of the limit values of paragraph 2, identified on the

---
basis of this consumption, as well as the frequency of updating the management plan referred to in part V of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree.
7. Compliance with the emission limit values provided for in paragraph 2 is ensured through the application of the best available techniques and, in particular, by using raw materials with a low or zero content of organic solvents, optimizing the operation and management of the activities and, where necessary, installing suitable abatement devices, in order to minimize the emissions of volatile organic compounds.
8. If the activities of paragraph 2 are carried out by one or more plants authorized before March 13, 2004, or by such plants jointly with machinery and non-fixed systems or manual operations, the emissions must be adapted to the relevant prescriptions of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree and to the other prescriptions of this article by October 31, 2007, or, in case of adaptation to what is provided for by the same Annex III, part IV, within the dates established therein. Without prejudice to what is established by the current legislation on integrated environmental authorization, the adaptation is carried out on the basis of the projects submitted to the competent authority pursuant to the ministerial decree of January 14, 2004, no. 44. The plants thus authorized are considered to be prior to 2006. In case of failure to submit the project or of denial of the approval of the project by the competent authority, the activities are considered to be in operation without authorization. The adaptation terms provided for in this paragraph also apply to the plants of paragraph 20, in operation on March 12, 2004, whose operators adhere to the general authorization provided for therein within six months of the entry into force of the fifth part of this decree or have previously adhered to the general authorizations adopted pursuant to art. 9 of the decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory of January 16, 2004, no. 44.
9. If the activities of paragraph 2 are carried out exclusively by machinery and non-fixed systems or by manual operations, in operation before the entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, the emissions must be adapted to the relevant prescriptions of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree and to the other prescriptions of this article by October 31, 2007. To this end, the authorization of paragraph 4 must be requested within six months of the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree. In case of failure to submit the request within this term, the activities are considered to be in operation without authorization.
10. Authorizations issued before March 13, 2004, which achieve greater containment of volatile organic compound emissions than that obtainable with the application of the indications of parts III and VI of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree, are without prejudice. In this case, the sampling and analysis methods previously in use remain valid. The right of the operator to request the competent authority to review these authorizations on the basis of the provisions of the fifth part of this decree is without prejudice.
11. The authorization application referred to in paragraph 4 must also be submitted by the operator of the activities referred to in paragraph 2, carried out pursuant to paragraphs 8 and 9, where the same are subject to substantial modifications. The authorization prescribes that the emissions of the plants, systems and non-fixed machinery, and manual operations subject to substantial modification:
a) are immediately adapted to the prescriptions of this article or
b) are adapted to the prescriptions of this article by October 31, 2007, if the total emissions of all the activities carried out by the operator in the same place do not exceed those that occur in the case of application of letter a).
12. If the operator proves to the competent authority that, despite using the best available technique, it is not possible to respect the limit value for diffuse emissions, this authority may authorize derogations from this limit value, provided that this does not entail risks to human health or the environment.
13. In the cases provided for in part III of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree, the competent authority may exempt the operator from applying the prescriptions established therein if the emissions cannot be channelled pursuant to Article 270, paragraphs 1 and 2. In this case, what is provided for in part IV of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree applies, unless the operator proves to the competent authority that compliance with this Annex is not, in the specific case, technically and economically feasible and that the plant uses the best available technique.
14. The competent authority shall communicate to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory,

---
in the report referred to in paragraph 18, the derogations authorized pursuant to paragraphs 12 and 13.
15. If two or more activities carried out in the same place individually exceed the thresholds of paragraph 2, the competent authority may:
a) apply the limit values provided for by that paragraph to each single activity or
b) apply a total emission value, referring to the sum of the emissions of these activities, not higher than that which would be obtained by applying what is provided for in letter a); this option does not extend to the emissions of the substances indicated in paragraph 17.
16. The operator who, in the cases provided for by paragraph 8, uses an abatement device that allows compliance with an emission limit value of 50 mgC/Nm3, in case of combustion, and 150 mgC/Nm3, in all other cases, must respect the limit values for channelled emissions of part III of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree by April 1, 2013, provided that the total emissions do not exceed those that would have been produced in case of application of the prescriptions of part III of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree.
17. Part I of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree establishes specific emission limit values for substances characterized by particular risks to health and the environment.
18. The competent authorities shall transmit to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, every three years and by April 30, starting from 2005, a report on the application of this article, in accordance with what is provided for by decision 2002/529/EC of June 27, 2002 of the European Commission. A copy of the report is sent by the competent authorities to the region or autonomous province. The Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory sends this information to the European Commission.
19. For VOC emissions from plants prior to 1988, regulated by this article, the limit values and prescriptions of Annex I to the fifth part of this decree shall apply until the dates provided for in paragraphs 8 and 9 or until the date of effective adaptation of the plants, if earlier.
20. The operators of closed-cycle plants for dry cleaning of fabrics and furs, excluding furs, and of closed-cycle laundries, for which the competent authority has not adopted general authorizations, shall communicate to such authorities their adhesion to the authorization of part VII of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree. The power of the same authorities to subsequently adopt new general authorizations, pursuant to Article 272, the adhesion to which entails, for the interested party, the lapse of that provided for in part VII of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree with respect to the territory to which such new authorizations refer, is without prejudice. The prescriptions of part I, paragraph 3, points 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree do not apply to such activities.
21. The following constitutes a substantial modification, pursuant to this article:
a) for small-scale activities, a modification of the maximum theoretical solvent consumption that entails an increase in volatile organic compound emissions by more than twenty-five percent;
b) for all other activities, a modification of the maximum theoretical solvent consumption that entails an increase in volatile organic compound emissions by more than ten percent;
c) any modification which, in the opinion of the competent authority, could have significant negative effects on human health or the environment;
d) any modification of the maximum theoretical solvent consumption that entails a change in the applicable limit values;
22. For small-scale activities, pursuant to paragraph 21, the activities referred to in part III, points 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 13, 16, or 17 of Annex III to the fifth part of this decree having a maximum theoretical solvent consumption less than or equal to the lower of the consumption thresholds indicated therein in the third column and the other activities of part III of the same Annex III having a maximum theoretical solvent consumption of less than 10 tons per year are intended.

**Art. 276**
**Control of VOC emissions resulting from the storage of gasoline and its distribution from terminals to distribution plants**
1. Annex VII to the fifth part of this decree establishes the prescriptions that

---
must be respected for the control of VOC emissions relating to:
a) storage plants at terminals;
b) gasoline loading plants at terminals;
c) plants used for the temporary storage of vapors at terminals;
d) mobile tanks and road tankers;
e) storage plants at fuel distribution plants;
f) equipment for gasoline transfer operations at distribution plants and at terminals where temporary vapor storage is permitted.
2. For the purposes of this article, storage plants are understood to be fixed tanks used for the storage of gasoline. For such storage plants located at terminals, the relevant prescriptions of Annex VII to the fifth part of this decree constitute the measures that operators must adopt pursuant to Article 269, paragraph 16. With a specific provision, the competent authority may grant derogations from these prescriptions, relating to cladding obligations, where necessary for the protection of areas of particular value from a landscape perspective.
3. For the purposes of this article, distribution plants are understood to be plants where gasoline is dispensed to the tanks of all motor vehicles from storage plants.
4. In terminals within which a quantity of gasoline of less than 10,000 tons/year is handled and whose construction was authorized before December 3, 1997, pursuant to the legislation in force at the time of authorization, the loading plants shall adapt to the provisions of part II, paragraph 2, of Annex VII to the fifth part of this decree by May 17, 2010. Until the date of adaptation, the accessibility of loading operations must be guaranteed also for road tankers with top loading. For the quantity handled, the maximum total annual quantity of gasoline loaded into mobile tanks from the terminal's storage plants in the three years preceding May 17, 2000 is intended.
5. The prescriptions of part II, point 3.2, of Annex VII to the fifth part of this decree apply to road tankers tested after November 17, 2000 and extend to other road tankers starting from May 17, 2010. These prescriptions do not apply to road tankers with calibrated compartments, tested after January 1, 1990 and equipped with a device that guarantees complete vapor tightness during the loading phase. For such road tankers with calibrated compartments, the accessibility of loading operations at the terminal's storage plants must be permitted.

**Art. 277**
**Recovery of VOCs produced during the refuelling of motor vehicles at fuel distribution plants**
1. The distributors of fuel distribution plants must be equipped with vapor recovery systems for gasoline that are produced during the refuelling of motor vehicles. The distribution plants and the vapor recovery systems must comply with the relevant prescriptions of Annex VIII to the fifth part of this decree, relating to efficiency requirements, construction requirements, installation requirements, periodic checks, and documentation obligations.
2. For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
a) distribution plants: any plant where gasoline is dispensed to the tanks of motor vehicles from storage plants;
b) storage plants: the fixed tanks used for the storage of gasoline at distribution plants;
c) dispenser: any apparatus intended for the dispensing of gasoline; the dispenser must be equipped with a suitable dispensing pump capable of drawing from the storage plants or, alternatively, be connected to a centralized pumping system; if inserted in a fuel distribution plant in relation to the public, the dispenser must also be equipped with a suitable device for indicating and calculating the quantities of gasoline dispensed;
d) vapor recovery system: the set of devices designed to prevent the emission into the atmosphere of VOCs during the refuelling of motor vehicles. This set of devices includes dispensing nozzles designed for vapor recovery, coaxial or twin flexible hoses, splitters for separating the vapor line from the fuel dispensing line, internal connections to the dispensers, underground lines for the passage of vapors to the tanks, and all the equipment and

---
devices to ensure the functioning of the plants in conditions of safety and efficiency.
3. The component devices of the vapor recovery systems must be approved by the Ministry of the Interior, to which the manufacturer submits a specific request accompanied by the necessary documentation to identify the devices and by the certification referred to in paragraph 2, point 2.3, of Annex VIII to the fifth part of this decree. For the purpose of issuing the approval, the Ministry of the Interior verifies the conformity of the devices to the efficiency requirements of paragraph 1 and to the fire safety requirements of the ministerial decree of July 31, 1934. In case of no decision, the approval is considered denied.
4. The component devices of the vapor recovery systems that have been approved by the competent authorities of other countries belonging to the European Union may be used to equip the distributors of the distribution plants, subject to recognition by the Ministry of the Interior, to which the manufacturer submits a specific request, accompanied by the necessary documentation to identify the devices, by the test certifications issued by the competent foreign authorities, and by a sworn translation into Italian of these documents and certifications. For the purpose of recognition, the Ministry of the Interior verifies the transmitted documents and certifications and the conformity of the devices to the fire safety requirements of the ministerial decree of July 31, 1934. In case of no decision, the recognition is considered denied.
5. During the refuelling of motor vehicles, the operators of the distribution plants must keep the vapor recovery systems of paragraph 1 in operation.

**Art. 278**
**Powers of ordinance**
1. In case of non-compliance with the prescriptions contained in the authorization, without prejudice to the application of the sanctions of Article 279 and the precautionary measures ordered by the judicial authority, the competent authority proceeds, according to the seriousness of the infringement:
a) to a warning, with the assignment of a term within which the irregularities must be eliminated;
b) to a warning and the simultaneous suspension of the authorized activity for a determined period, where situations of danger to health or the environment arise;
c) to the revocation of the authorization and the closure of the plant or the cessation of the activity, in case of failure to adapt to the prescriptions imposed with the warning or if the repeated non-compliance with the prescriptions contained in the authorization determines situations of danger or damage to health or the environment.

**Art. 279**
**Sanctions**
1. Whoever begins to install or operate a plant and who carries out an activity in the absence of the prescribed authorization or continues the operation of the plant or activity with an expired, lapsed, suspended, revoked authorization or after the order of closure of the plant or cessation of the activity is punished with the penalty of arrest from two months to two years or a fine from two hundred and fifty-eight euros to one thousand and thirty-two euros. Whoever subjects a plant to a substantial modification without the authorization provided for by Article 269, paragraph 8, is punished with the penalty of arrest up to six months or a fine up to one thousand and thirty-two euros; whoever subjects a plant to a non-substantial modification without making the communication provided for by the said Article 269, paragraph 8, is punished with a fine up to one thousand euros.
2. Whoever, in the exercise of a plant or an activity, violates the emission limit values or the prescriptions established by the authorization, by Annex I to the fifth part of this decree, by the plans and programs, or by the legislation of Article 271, or the prescriptions otherwise imposed by the competent authority pursuant to this title is punished with arrest up to one year or a fine up to one thousand and thirty-two euros.
3. Whoever puts a plant into operation or begins to carry out an activity without having given the prior communication prescribed pursuant to Article 269, paragraph 5 or paragraph 15, or pursuant to Article 272, paragraph 1, is punished with arrest up to one year or with a fine up to one thousand and thirty-two euros.

---
4. Whoever fails to communicate to the competent authority the data relating to emissions pursuant to Article 269, paragraph 5, is punished with arrest up to six months or with a fine up to one thousand and thirty-two euros.
5. In the cases provided for in paragraph 2, the penalty of arrest up to one year always applies if the exceedance of the emission limit values also determines the exceedance of the air quality limit values provided for by the current legislation.
6. Whoever, in the cases provided for by Article 281, paragraph 1, fails to take all necessary measures to avoid an increase, even temporary, of emissions is punished with the penalty of arrest up to one year or a fine up to one thousand and thirty-two euros.
7. For the violation of the prescriptions of Article 276, in the case where the same is not subject to the sanctions provided for in paragraphs 1 to 6, and for the violation of the prescriptions of Article 277, an administrative pecuniary sanction from fifteen thousand four hundred and ninety-three euros to one hundred and fifty-four thousand nine hundred and thirty-seven euros applies. The region or the different authority indicated by the regional law shall impose this sanction, pursuant to Articles 17 and following of law no. 689 of 24 November 1981. The suspension of the existing authorizations is always ordered in case of recidivism.

**Art. 280**
**Repeals**
1. The following are repealed, excluding the provisions for which this decree provides for their continued validity and without prejudice to what is established by art. 14 of legislative decree no. 351 of 4 August 1999:
a) the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988;
b) art. 4 of law no. 413 of 4 November 1997;
c) art. 12, paragraph 8, of legislative decree no. 387 of 29 December 2003;
d) the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 105 of 10 March 1987;
e) the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 8 May 1989;
f) the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 21 July 1989;
g) the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 12 July 1990;
h) the decree of the President of the Republic of 25 July 1991;
i) the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 21 December 1995;
l) the decree of the Minister of the Environment of 16 May 1996;
m) the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 76 of 20 January 1999;
n) the decree of the Minister of the Environment no. 107 of 21 January 2000;
o) the decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory no. 44 of 16 January 2004.

**Art. 281**
**Transitional and final provisions**
1. The operators of plants authorized, also provisionally or tacitly, pursuant to the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988, with the exclusion of those equipped with a general authorization which are subject to the discipline of Article 272, paragraph 3, must submit an authorization application pursuant to Article 269 within the terms indicated below. The regions and autonomous provinces shall adopt, in compliance with these terms, specific calendars for the submission of applications; in case of failure to adopt the calendars, the authorization application must in any case be submitted within the terms established by this paragraph. The failure to submit the application within the terms, including those set by the calendars, entails the lapse of the previous authorization. If the application is submitted within the terms, the operation of the plants may be continued until the decision of the competent authority; in case of no decision within the terms provided for by Article 269, paragraph 3, the operation may be continued until the expiry of the term provided for the decision of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who has been requested to provide for it pursuant to the same article. In the case of plants authorized provisionally or tacitly, the operator must adopt, until the decision of the competent authority, all the necessary measures to avoid an increase, even temporary, of emissions. The authorization application of this paragraph must be submitted within the following terms:
a) between the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree and 31 December 2010, for plants prior to 1988;
b) between 1 January 2011 and 31 December 2014, for plants prior to 2006 that were authorized before 1 January 2000;
c) between 1 January 2015 and 31 December 2018, for plants prior to 2006 that were authorized after 31 December 1999.
2. The operators of plants and activities in operation at the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree that fall within the scope of application of this title and did not fall within the scope of application of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 203 of 24 May 1988, shall adapt to the provisions of this title within three years from that date and, in the case where they are subject to authorization for emissions, shall submit the relative application, pursuant to Article 269 or pursuant to Article 272, paragraphs 2 and 3, at least eighteen months before the adaptation deadline. In case of failure to submit the application within the provided term, the plant or activity is considered in operation without authorization for emissions. If the application is submitted within the provided term, the operation may be continued until the decision of the competent authority; in case of no decision within the terms provided for by Article 269, paragraph 3, the operation may be continued until the expiry of the term provided for the decision of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who has been requested to provide for it pursuant to the same article. For the plants, the authorization establishes the limit values and prescriptions:
a) pursuant to Article 271, paragraphs 6 and 9, if the plant was built before 1988 in accordance with the legislation in force at the time;
b) pursuant to Article 271, paragraphs 8 and 9, if the plant must be built pursuant to Article 269, paragraphs 10 or 12, or was built between 1988 and the entry into force of the fifth part of this decree in accordance with the legislation in force at the time.
3. For plants in operation at the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree that fall within the scope of application of this title and that fell within the scope of application of law no. 615 of 13 July 1966, of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 1391 of 22 December 1970, or of title II of the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 March 2002, the competent authority shall adopt the general authorizations of Article 272, paragraph 2, within fifteen months from that date. In case of failure to adopt the general authorization, within the prescribed term, the same is issued with a specific decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and the operators of the interested plants communicate their adhesion to the competent authority; the power of this authority to subsequently adopt new general authorizations, pursuant to Article 272, the adhesion to which entails, for the interested party, the lapse of that adopted by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, is without prejudice.
4. The operators of plants and activities that fell within annexes 1 and 2 of the decree of the President of the Republic of 25 July 1991 and that, by effect of the fifth part of this decree, are required to obtain a specific authorization for emissions, shall submit the relative request within fifteen months of the entry into force of the fifth part of this decree; in this case, if the plant is subject to Article 275, the competent authority shall issue the authorization on the basis of the projects submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of the same article, with the terms provided for in Article 269, paragraph 3, starting from the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree. In case of failure to submit the application within the provided term, the plant or activity is considered in operation without authorization for emissions. If the application is submitted within the provided term, the operation of such plants or activities may be continued until the decision of the competent authority; in case of no decision within the terms provided for by Article 269, paragraph 3, the operation may be continued until the expiry of the term provided for the decision of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who has been requested to provide for it pursuant to the same article.
5. The integration and modification of the annexes to the fifth part of this decree shall be carried out by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, with the methods of Article 3, paragraph 2, in concert with the Minister of Health and with the Minister of Production Activities, after consulting the Unified Conference of Article 8 of legislative decree no. 281 of 28 August 1997. The adoption of such acts shall also be carried out in concert with the Minister of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, with regard to emissions from agricultural activities, and in concert with the Ministers of the Interior, of Infrastructure and Transport, and of Economy and Finance, with regard to the modification of Annexes VII and VIII to the fifth part of this decree. Annex I and Annex VI to the fifth part of this decree are integrated and modified for the first time within one year of the entry into force of the fifth part of the same decree.
6. The modification and integration of the Annexes to the fifth part of this decree, in order to implement the community directives for the parts in which they involve modifications of the executive modalities and of the technical characteristics established by the current rules, shall be carried out pursuant to art. 13 of law no. 11 of 4 February 2005.
7. The authorization applications, the measures adopted by the competent authority, and the results of the control activities, pursuant to this title, as well as the lists of authorized activities in the possession of the competent authority, are made available to the public pursuant to the provisions of legislative decree no. 195 of 19 August 2005.
8. The State, the regions, the autonomous provinces, and the provinces shall organize their respective inventories of emission sources. The criteria for the elaboration of these inventories are established by decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Production Activities and with the Minister of Health.
9. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance, a commission for the collection, processing, and dissemination, among the competent authorities, of the data and information relevant for the application of the fifth part of this decree and for the evaluation of the best available techniques of Article 268, paragraph 1, letter aa), is established, without charges on public finance. The commission is composed of a representative appointed by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, with the functions of president, a representative appointed by the Minister of Production Activities, a representative appointed by the Minister of Health, and five representatives appointed by the Unified Conference of Article 8 of legislative decree no. 281 of 28 August 1997. One or more representatives of each region or autonomous province may participate in the meetings of the Commission. The establishing decree also regulates the operating methods of the commission, including the frequency of the meetings, and the methods of participation of subjects other than the components. No compensation, allowances, emoluments of any kind, or expense reimbursements are due to the members of the commission and to the other subjects who participate in its meetings.
10. Without prejudice to the powers established by Article 271 in the adoption of the plans and programs provided for therein and in the issuance of the authorization, in the presence of particular situations of health risk or zones that require particular environmental protection, the regions and autonomous provinces, with a general measure, after agreement with the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and with the Minister of Health, for what concerns them, may establish emission limit values and prescriptions, also concerning the construction or operating conditions of the plants, more severe than those set by the annexes to this title, provided that this is necessary for the achievement of the limit values and target values of air quality.

**TITLE II - CIVIL THERMAL PLANTS**

**Art. 282**
**Scope of application**
1. This title regulates, for the purposes of prevention and limitation of atmospheric pollution, civil thermal plants with a nominal thermal power lower than the relevant thresholds established by Article 269, paragraph 14. Civil thermal plants with a nominal thermal power equal to or greater than these thresholds and civil thermal plants that use steam coal, metallurgical coke, gas coke, anthracite, anthracitic products, or mixtures of anthracite and anthracitic products, with a nominal thermal power greater than 3 MW, are subject to the provisions of Title I.

**Art. 283**
**Definitions**
1. For the purposes of this title, the following definitions apply:
a) thermal plant: plant intended for the production of heat consisting of one or more heat generators and a single system for the distribution and utilization of this heat, as well as specific regulation and control devices;
b) heat generator: any combustion device powered by fuels for the purpose of producing hot water or steam, consisting of a firebox, a heat exchanger, and a burner;
c) firebox: part of a heat generator in which the combustion process takes place;
d) civil thermal plant: thermal plant whose heat production is intended, also in non-residential buildings, for the heating or air conditioning of environments or for the heating of water for hygienic and sanitary uses; the civil thermal plant is centralized if it serves all the units of the building or of several buildings and is individual in other cases;
e) nominal thermal power of the plant: the sum of the nominal thermal powers of the individual fireboxes constituting the plant;
f) nominal thermal power of the firebox: the product of the lower calorific value of the fuel used and the maximum flow rate of fuel burned within the firebox, expressed in thermal watts or its multiples;
g) threshold value: nominal thermal power of the plant equal to 0.035MW;
h) modification of the plant: any intervention that involves a variation of the data contained in the report of Article 284 or in the documentation submitted pursuant to Articles 9 and 10 of law no. 615 of 13 July 1966;
i) competent authority: the municipalities with a population greater than forty thousand inhabitants and, in the remaining part of the territory, the provinces;
l) installer: the subject indicated in art. 108 of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 380 of 6 June 2001;
m) person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant: the subject indicated in art. 11, paragraph 1, of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 412 of 26 August 1993;
n) operation of a thermal plant: the set of operations necessary to ensure correct combustion in the fireboxes and the adaptation of the thermal plant's regime to the heat demand.

**Art. 284**
**Report of installation or modification**
1. In case of installation or modification of a civil thermal plant with a nominal thermal power greater than the threshold value, a specific report, prepared by the installer using the form in part I of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree and made available by him to the person required to transmit it, must be transmitted to the competent authority within ninety days of the intervention. For installations and modifications subsequent to the term provided for by Article 286, paragraph 4, this report is accompanied by the documentation relating to the verification carried out pursuant to the same article. The report is transmitted by the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant. In the case of individual thermal plants, if the person responsible for the operation and maintenance is not the owner or the possessor or their delegate, the report is transmitted by the owner or, if different, by the possessor and is made available by him to the person responsible for the operation and maintenance.
2. For civil thermal plants with a nominal thermal power greater than the threshold value, in operation at the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, a specific report, prepared by the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant using the form in part I of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree, accompanied by the documents attached to the plant logbook pursuant to Article 286, paragraph 2, must be transmitted to the competent authority within one year of that date. The report is transmitted by the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant. In the case of individual thermal plants, if the person responsible for the operation and maintenance is not the owner or the possessor or their delegate, the report is made available to the owner or, if different, to the possessor, who shall carry out the transmission. This paragraph does not apply to civil thermal plants for which the procedure provided for by Articles 9 and 10 of law no. 615 of 13 July 1966 has been completed.

**Art. 285**
**Technical characteristics**
1. Civil thermal plants with a nominal thermal power greater than the threshold value must comply with the technical characteristics provided for in part II of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree relevant to the type of fuel used.

**Art. 286**
**Emission limit values**
1. The atmospheric emissions of civil thermal plants with a nominal thermal power greater than the threshold value must respect the limit values provided for in part III of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree.
2. The emission values of the plants of paragraph 1 must be checked at least annually by the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant during the normal control and maintenance operations. The measured values, with an indication of the relative dates, the measurement methods used, and the subject who carried out the measurement, must be attached to the plant logbook provided for by the decree of the President of the Republic of 26 August 1993, no. 412. This annual check of the emission values is not required in the cases provided for in part III, section 1 of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree. The documents attesting to the performance of the maintenance necessary to guarantee compliance with the emission limit values provided for by the report of Article 284 must also be attached to the plant logbook.
3. For the purposes of sampling, analysis, and evaluation of the emissions of the thermal plants of paragraph 1, the methods provided for in part III of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree apply.
4. As of one hundred and eighty days from the date of entry into force of the fifth part of this decree, the installer, at the time of the installation or modification of the plant, shall verify compliance with the emission limit values provided for by this article.

**Art. 287**
**Authorization to operate**
1. The personnel assigned to the operation of civil thermal plants with a nominal thermal power greater than 0.232 MW must be in possession of an operating license issued by the provincial Labour Inspectorate, at the end of a course for the operation of thermal plants, after passing the final exam. The licenses can be issued to persons aged no less than eighteen years. At each provincial Labour Inspectorate, a register of those authorized to operate thermal plants is compiled and updated, a copy of which is also kept at the competent authority and at the provincial command of the fire brigade.
2. The provisions of art. 11, paragraph 3, of the decree of the President of the Republic of 26 August 1993, no. 412 remain unaffected.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, two grades of authorization are provided. The first-grade license authorizes the operation of thermal plants for which the certificate of authorization for the operation of steam generators under the royal decree of 12 May 1927, no. 824, is required, and the second-grade license authorizes the operation of other plants. The first-grade license also authorizes the operation of plants for which the second-grade license is required.
4. The possession of an authorization certificate of any grade for the operation of steam generators, pursuant to the royal decree of 12 May 1927, no. 824, allows the issuance of the license without the need for the exam referred to in paragraph 1.
5. The license can be revoked at any time by the provincial Labour Inspectorate in case of irregular operation of the plant. To this end, the competent authority communicates to the Inspectorate the cases of irregular operation ascertained. The measure of suspension or revocation of the certificate of authorization for the operation of steam generators pursuant to articles 31 and 32 of the royal decree of 12 May 1927, no. 824, has no effect on the license referred to in this article.
6. The decree of the Minister for Labour and Social Security of 12 August 1968 establishes the discipline of the courses and exams referred to in paragraph 1 and of the revisions of the licenses. The modification and integration of this decree are provided for by decree of the Minister of Labour and Social Policies.

**Art. 288**
**Controls and sanctions**

---
1. The installer who, on the occasion of the installation or modification of a civil thermal plant, does not prepare the report referred to in Article 284, paragraph 1, or prepares an incomplete report, and the person required to transmit this report who, having received it, does not transmit it to the competent authority within the prescribed terms, is punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from five hundred and sixteen euros to two thousand five hundred and eighty-two euros. The same sanction punishes the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant who does not prepare the report referred to in Article 284, paragraph 2, or prepares an incomplete report, and the person required to transmit this report who, having received it, does not transmit it to the competent authority within the prescribed terms.
2. In case of operation of a civil thermal plant not compliant with the technical characteristics of Article 285, the following are punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from five hundred and sixteen euros to two thousand five hundred and eighty-two euros:
a) the installer, where they are required to prepare the report of Article 284, paragraph 1;
b) the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant, where they are required to prepare the report of Article 284, paragraph 2.
3. In the case where the plant does not respect the emission limit values of Article 286, paragraph 1, the following are punished with an administrative pecuniary sanction from five hundred and sixteen euros to two thousand five hundred and eighty-two euros:
a) the person responsible for the operation and maintenance, in all cases where the plant is not subject to the verification obligation of Article 286, paragraph 4;
b) the installer and the person responsible for the operation and maintenance, if compliance with the limit values has not been verified pursuant to Article 286, paragraph 4, or has not been declared in the report of Article 284, paragraph 1;
c) the installer, if compliance with the limit values has been verified pursuant to Article 286, paragraph 4, and declared in the report of Article 284, paragraph 1, and if from the plant logbook it appears that the controls and maintenance prescribed by the fifth part of this decree and by the decree of the President of the Republic of 26 August 1993, no. 412, are regularly carried out, provided that the duration established for the life cycle of the plant has not been exceeded;
d) the person responsible for the operation and maintenance, if compliance with the limit values has been verified pursuant to Article 286, paragraph 4, and declared in the report of Article 284, paragraph 1, and if from the plant logbook it does not appear that the prescribed controls and maintenance are regularly carried out or the duration established for the life cycle of the plant has been exceeded.
4. With an administrative pecuniary sanction from five hundred and sixteen euros to two thousand five hundred and eighty-two euros, the person responsible for the operation and maintenance of the plant who does not carry out the annual check of the emissions pursuant to Article 286, paragraph 2, or does not attach the data provided therein to the plant logbook, is punished.
5. Without prejudice to the application of the sanctions provided for in the preceding paragraphs and the sanctions provided for the production of false declarations or false attestations, the competent authority, where it ascertains that the plant does not respect the technical characteristics of Article 285 or the emission limit values of Article 286, shall, with its own measure, order the offender to proceed with the adaptation within a determined period beyond which the plant cannot be used. In case of non-compliance with the measure adopted by the competent authority, art. 650 of the penal code applies.
6. The competent authority referred to in Article 283, paragraph 1, letter i), or the different authority indicated by the regional law, shall impose the administrative sanctions provided for in this article, pursuant to Articles 17 and following of law no. 689 of 24 November 1981.
7. Whoever operates a civil thermal plant with a nominal thermal power greater than 0.322 MW without being in possession, where prescribed, of the license of Article 287 is punished with a fine from fifteen euros to forty-six euros.
8. The controls relating to compliance with this title are carried out by the competent authority, with a frequency of at least biennial, also using external organizations with specific technical competence, within the limits of the resources available under current legislation. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Minister of Production Activities and the Minister of Health, the requirements of these organizations are identified. Until the adoption of this decree, the requirements provided for by art. 11, paragraph 19, of the decree of the President of the Republic of 26 August 1993, no. 412, shall apply.

---
**Art. 289**
**Repeals**
1. The following are repealed, excluding the provisions for which this decree provides for further validity: law no. 615 of 13 July 1966, and the decree of the President of the Republic no. 1391 of 22 December 1970.

**Art. 290**
**Transitional and final provisions**
1. The modification and integration of Annex IX to the fifth part of this decree shall be carried out with the methods provided for by Article 281, paragraph 5.
2. The installation of centralized civil thermal plants may be imposed by municipal building regulations with regard to building renovation interventions and new construction interventions if this measure is identified by the plans and programs provided for by art. 8 of legislative decree no. 351 of 4 August 1999, as necessary for the achievement of air quality limit values.
3. Law no. 615 of 13 July 1966, the decree of the President of the Republic no. 1391 of 22 December 1970, and title II of the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 March 2002 shall continue to apply to the civil thermal plants of Article 281, paragraph 3, until the date on which the adaptation ordered by the authorizations issued pursuant to Article 281, paragraph 2, is carried out.

**TITLE III - FUELS**

**Art. 291**
**Scope of application**
1. This title regulates, for the purposes of the prevention and limitation of atmospheric pollution, the product characteristics of the fuels that can be used in the plants of titles I and II of the fifth part of this decree, including civil thermal plants with a thermal power lower than the threshold value, and the product characteristics of marine gas oil. This title also establishes the conditions for the use of fuels, including the prescriptions aimed at optimizing the combustion efficiency, and the methods for measuring the product characteristics.

**Art. 292**
**Definitions**
1. For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise provided, the definitions of title I and title II of the fifth part of this decree apply.
2. In addition to the definitions of paragraph 1, the following definitions apply:
a) heavy fuel oil: any liquid fuel derived from petroleum of CN code 2710 1951 - 2710 1969 or any liquid fuel derived from petroleum, excluding gas oil as per letters b) and d), which, due to its distillation limits, falls into the category of heavy oils intended for use as fuel and of which less than sixty-five percent by volume, including losses, distils at 250 C according to the ASTM D86 method, even if the percentage of the distillate at 250 C cannot be determined according to the aforementioned method;
b) gas oil: any liquid fuel derived from petroleum of CN code 2710 1945 - 2710 1949, or any liquid fuel derived from petroleum which, due to its distillation limits, falls into the category of middle distillates intended for use as a combustible or fuel and of which at least eighty-five percent by volume, including losses, distils at 350 C according to the ASTM D86 method;
c) ASTM method: the methods established by the "American Society for Testing and Materials" in the 1976 edition of the definitions and standard specifications for petroleum and lubricating products;
d) marine gas oil: any fuel for marine use that corresponds to the definition of letter b) or that has a viscosity or density that falls within the viscosity or density limits defined for marine distillates in the table of ISO 8217-1996, with the exclusion of that used for vessels intended for internal navigation, for which the provisions of legislative decree no. 66 of 21 March 2005 apply, and with the exclusion of that used by ships that come directly from a country not belonging to the European Union;
e) internal navigation: navigation on lakes, rivers, canals, and other internal waters.
f) tax warehouses: plants where the fuels covered by the fifth part of this decree, subject to excise duty, are manufactured, processed, held, received, or dispatched; this definition also includes fuel production plants.
g) fuel subject to excise duty: fuel to which the fiscal regime of excise duties applies.

**Art. 293**
**Permitted fuels**
1. In the plants regulated by title I and title II of the fifth part of this decree, including civil thermal plants with a thermal power lower than the threshold value, only the fuels provided for these categories of plants by Annex X to the fifth part of this decree may be used, under the conditions provided therein. For the plants of part I, letters e) and f), of Annex IV to the fifth part of this decree, the prescriptions of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree relating to the plants regulated by title II of the fifth part of this decree apply. Marine gas oil must comply with what is provided for in part I, section 3, of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree.
2. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in concert with the Ministers of Production Activities and of Health, upon authorization of the European Commission, maximum limit values for the sulfur content in heavy fuel oils or in gas oil, including marine gas oil, may be established, higher than those set in Annex X to the fifth part of this decree if, due to a sudden change in the supply of crude oil, petroleum products, or other hydrocarbons, it is not possible to respect these limit values.

**Art. 294**
**Prescriptions for combustion efficiency**
1. In order to optimize combustion efficiency, the plants regulated by title I of the fifth part of this decree, with a nominal thermal power of 6 MW or more, must be equipped with temperature detectors in the gaseous effluent as well as an analyzer for the continuous measurement and recording of free oxygen and carbon monoxide. The aforesaid parameters must be detected in the gaseous effluent at the outlet of the plant. These plants must also be equipped, where technically feasible, with automatic regulation of the air-fuel ratio. For the purposes of applying this paragraph, reference is made to the nominal thermal power of each single plant even in cases where multiple plants are considered, pursuant to Article 270, paragraph 4, or Article 273, paragraph 9, as a single plant.
2. Paragraph 1 does not apply to combustion plants in possession of an authorization for atmospheric emissions or an integrated environmental authorization in which an emission limit value into the atmosphere for carbon monoxide is prescribed.
3. In order to optimize combustion efficiency, the plants regulated by title II of the fifth part of this decree, with a total thermal power of 1.5 MW or more, must be equipped with temperature detectors in the gaseous effluents as well as an analyzer for the continuous measurement and recording of free oxygen and carbon monoxide. The aforesaid parameters must be detected in the gaseous effluent at the outlet of the firebox.

**Art. 295**
**Collection and transmission of data relating to the sulfur content of certain liquid fuels**
1. In order to allow the preparation of the report referred to in paragraph 4, the control of the characteristics of heavy fuel oil, gas oil, and marine gas oil produced or imported, and destined for commercialization on the national market, is carried out by the customs chemical laboratories or, where established, by the customs offices in whose area the customs chemical laboratories operate. Sampling is carried out with an adequate frequency and according to methods that ensure the representativeness of the samples with respect to the controlled fuel. By March 31 of each year, the results of these checks carried out during the previous year are made available to the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) and to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory.
2. By March 31 of each year, the operators of the tax warehouses that import the fuels of paragraph 1 from third countries or receive them from member countries of the European Union and the operators of the plants for the production of the same fuels shall send to the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) and to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, observing the methods and using the forms indicated in part I, section 3, appendix 1, of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree, the data concerning the quantities and sulfur content of such fuels produced or imported, and destined for commercialization on the national market, during the previous year. The data refer to the fuels stored in the tanks in which they are subject to assessment aimed at verifying their quantity and quality for fiscal classification purposes. By March 31 of each year, the operators of the large combustion plants that import heavy fuel oil from third countries or receive it from member countries of the European Union shall send to the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) and to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, observing the methods and using the forms indicated in part I, section 3, appendix 1 of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree, the data concerning the quantities of heavy fuel oil imported in the previous year and the relative sulfur content.
3. By March 31 of each year, the operators of the plants of part I, section 3, point 1.2, of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree shall send to the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT) and to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, observing the methods and using the forms indicated by that section in appendix 2, the data concerning the quantities and sulfur content of the heavy fuel oil used during the previous year.
4. By May 31 of each year, the Agency for the Protection of the Environment and for Technical Services (APAT), on the basis of the results of the controls of paragraph 1 and the data of paragraphs 2 and 3, shall transmit to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory a report on the sulfur content of the fuels of paragraph 1 produced, imported, and used in the previous civil year and on the cases of application of the derogations of part I, section 3, point 1.2, of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree.
5. By June 30 of each year, the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall send to the European Commission a document prepared on the basis of the report of paragraph 4.
6. Fuels destined for transformation before final combustion and fuels used for transformation purposes in the refining industry are not subject to this article.

**Art. 296**
**Sanctions**
1. Whoever carries out the combustion of materials or substances not compliant with the prescriptions of this title, where the same do not constitute waste pursuant to current legislation, is punished:
a) in the case of combustion carried out at the plants of title I of the fifth part of this decree, with arrest for up to two years or with a fine from two hundred and fifty-eight euros to one thousand and thirty-two euros;
b) in the case of combustion carried out at the plants of title II of the fifth part of this decree, including civil thermal plants with a thermal power lower than the threshold value, with an administrative pecuniary sanction from two hundred euros to one thousand euros; for this sanction, to be imposed pursuant to Article 288, paragraph 6, the payment in a reduced measure of art. 16 of law no. 689 of 24 November 1981 does not apply; the sanction does not apply if, from the documentation relating to the purchase of such materials or substances, product characteristics compliant with those of the fuels permitted in the plant result, without prejudice to the application of art. 515 of the penal code and the other crimes provided for by current legislation for those who carried out the marketing.
2. The sanction provided for in paragraph 1, letter b), also applies to those who carry out the combustion of marine gas oil not compliant with the prescriptions of this title. In this case, the competent authority for the imposition is the region or the different authority indicated by the

---
regional law.
3. The controls on compliance with the provisions of this title are carried out, for the plants of title I of the fifth part of this decree, by the authority of Article 268, paragraph 1, letter p), and for the plants of title II of the fifth part of this decree, by the authority of Article 283, paragraph 1, letter i).
4. In case of non-compliance with the prescriptions of Article 294, the operator of the plants regulated by title I of the fifth part of this decree is punished with arrest for up to one year or with a fine up to one thousand and thirty-two euros. For the plants regulated by title II of the fifth part of this decree, the sanction provided for by Article 288, paragraph 2, applies; the same sanction, in case of non-compliance with the prescriptions of Article 294, applies to the person responsible for the operation and maintenance if the case provided for in the last period of Article 284, paragraph 2, occurs.
5. In case of failure to transmit the data of Article 295, paragraphs 2 and 3, within the prescribed terms, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, also for the purposes of what is provided for by art. 650 of the penal code, orders the non-compliant subjects to comply.

**Art. 297**
**Repeals**
1. The following are repealed, excluding the provisions for which this decree provides for further validity: art. 2, paragraph 2, of law no. 349 of 8 July 1986, the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers no. 395 of 7 September 2001, the decree of the President of the Council of Ministers of 8 March 2002, and art. 2 of decree-law no. 22 of 7 March 2002, converted, with modifications, by law no. 82 of 6 May 2002.

**Art. 298**
**Transitional and final provisions**
1. The provisions of this title relating to the plants regulated by title I of the fifth part of this decree apply to the civil thermal plants of Article 281, paragraph 3, starting from the date on which the adaptation ordered by the authorizations issued pursuant to Article 281, paragraph 2, is carried out.
2. The modification and integration of Annex X to the fifth part of this decree shall be carried out with the methods provided for by Article 281, paragraphs 5 and 6. The integration of this Annex shall be carried out for the first time within one year of the entry into force of the fifth part of this decree.

**PART SIX - RULES ON COMPENSATORY PROTECTION AGAINST DAMAGE TO THE ENVIRONMENT**

**TITLE I - SCOPE OF APPLICATION**

**Art. 299**
**Ministerial competencies**
1. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall exercise the functions and tasks pertaining to the State in the matter of protection, prevention, and repair of damage to the environment, through the General Directorate for environmental damage established at the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory by art. 34 of decree-law no. 4 of 10 January 2006, and the other competent ministerial offices.
2. The ministerial action is normally carried out in collaboration with the regions, with the local authorities, and with any public law entity deemed suitable.
3. The ministerial action is carried out in compliance with the current community legislation on the prevention and repair of environmental damage, the competencies of the regions, the autonomous provinces of Trento and Bolzano, and the local authorities with the application of the constitutional principles of subsidiarity and loyal collaboration.
4. For the purposes related to the identification, ascertainment, and quantification of environmental damage, the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall avail itself, in

---
a conventional regime, of public and private entities of high and proven technical-scientific qualification operating in the territory, within the limits of the existing availabilities.
5. Within sixty days from the date of entry into force of this decree, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, with his own decree, in concert with the Ministers of Economy and Finance and of Production Activities, shall establish the criteria for the preliminary activities aimed at the ascertainment of environmental damage and for the collection of the sum due for patrimonial equivalent pursuant to title III of the sixth part of this decree. The related charges are borne by the person responsible for the damage.
6. For the purposes of implementing the provisions contained in this article, the Minister of Economy and Finance is authorized to make, with his own decrees, the necessary budget variations.

**Art. 300**
**Environmental damage**
1. Environmental damage is any significant and measurable deterioration, direct or indirect, of a natural resource or of the utility ensured by the latter.
2. Pursuant to Directive 2004/35/EC, environmental damage is the deterioration, in comparison to the original conditions, caused:
a) to the species and natural habitats protected by the national and community legislation of law no. 157 of 11 February 1992, containing rules for the protection of wild fauna, which transposes Council directives 79/409/EEC of 2 April 1979; 85/411/EEC of the Commission of 25 July 1985 and 91/244/EEC of the Commission of 6 March 1991 and implements the conventions of Paris of 18 October 1950 and of Bern of 19 September 1979, and of the decree of the President of the Republic no. 357 of 8 September 1997, containing a regulation implementing Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural and semi-natural habitats, as well as of wild flora and fauna, as well as to the protected natural areas of law no. 394 of 6 December 1991, and subsequent implementing rules;
b) to inland waters, by actions that have a significant negative impact on the ecological, chemical, and/or quantitative status or on the ecological potential of the waters concerned, as defined in Directive 2000/60/EC, with the exception of the negative effects to which art. 4, paragraph 7, of that directive applies;
c) to coastal waters and to those included in the territorial sea by the aforementioned actions, even if carried out in international waters;
d) to the land, by any contamination that creates a significant risk of harmful effects, even indirect, on human health as a result of the introduction into the soil, on the soil, or in the subsoil of substances, preparations, organisms, or harmful microorganisms for the environment.

**Art. 301**
**Implementation of the precautionary principle**
1. In application of the precautionary principle of Article 174, paragraph 2, of the EC Treaty, in case of dangers, even only potential, for human health and for the environment, a high level of protection must be ensured.
2. The application of the principle of paragraph 1 concerns the risk that can in any case be identified following a preliminary objective scientific assessment.
3. The interested operator, when the aforementioned risk emerges, must inform without delay, indicating all the relevant aspects of the situation, the municipality, the province, the region, or the autonomous province in whose territory the harmful event is foreseen, as well as the Prefect of the province who, within the following twenty-four hours, shall inform the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory.
4. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in application of the precautionary principle, has the right to adopt at any time prevention measures, pursuant to Article 304, which are:
a) proportional with respect to the level of protection to be achieved;
b) non-discriminatory in their application and consistent with similar measures already adopted;
c) based on the examination of the potential advantages and burdens;
d) updatable in the light of new scientific data.
5. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall promote public information on the negative effects of a product or a process and, taking into account the

---
financial resources provided for by current legislation, may finance research programs, order the use of environmental certification systems, and take any other initiative aimed at reducing the risks of environmental damage.

**Art. 302**
**Definitions**
1. The conservation status of a species is considered favorable when:
a) data relating to its population show that it is maintaining itself, in the long term, as a viable component of its natural habitats;
b) the natural area of the species is not being reduced nor will it likely be reduced in the foreseeable future;
c) there is, and will likely continue to exist, a sufficiently large habitat to maintain its population in the long term.
2. The conservation status of a natural habitat is considered favorable when:
a) its natural area and the zones enclosed therein are stable or increasing;
b) the specific structures and functions necessary for its long-term maintenance exist and will likely continue to exist in the foreseeable future; and
c) the conservation status of its typical species is favorable, pursuant to paragraph 1.
3. For "waters" all the waters to which the third part of this decree applies are intended.
4. "Operator" means any person, natural or legal, public or private, who exercises or controls a professional activity having environmental relevance or who in any case exercises decision-making power over the technical and financial aspects of this activity, including the holder of the permit or authorization to carry out said activity.
5. "Professional activity" means any action, whether or not for profit, carried out in the course of an economic, industrial, commercial, artisanal, agricultural, and service provision activity, public or private.
6. "Emission" means the release into the environment, as a result of human activity, of substances, preparations, organisms, or microorganisms.
7. "Imminent threat" of damage means a sufficiently high probability that specific environmental damage is about to occur.
8. "Prevention measures" means the measures taken to react to an event, an act, or an omission that has created an imminent threat of environmental damage, in order to prevent or minimize this damage.
9. "Restoration," also "natural," means: in the case of waters, protected species, and habitats, the return of the natural resources or damaged services to their original conditions; in the case of damage to the land, the elimination of any risk of harmful effects on human health and environmental integrity. In any case, the restoration must consist of the redevelopment of the site and its ecosystem, through any action or combination of actions, including mitigation or provisional measures, aimed at repairing, restoring or, if deemed admissible by the competent authority, replacing damaged natural resources or natural services.
10. "Natural resources" means protected species and natural habitats, water, and land.
11. "Services" and "services of natural resources" mean the functions performed by a natural resource for the benefit of other natural resources and/or the public.
12. "Original conditions" means the conditions, at the time of the damage, of the natural resources and services that would have existed if the environmental damage had not occurred, estimated on the basis of the best available information.
13. "Costs" means the economic charges justified by the need to ensure correct and effective implementation of the provisions of the sixth part of this decree, including the costs for assessing environmental damage or an imminent threat thereof, for planning alternative interventions, for supporting administrative, legal, and works implementation expenses, the costs of data collection and other general costs, as well as the costs of control and surveillance.

**Art. 303**
**Exclusions**
1. The sixth part of this decree:
a) does not concern environmental damage or the imminent threat of such damage caused by:
1) acts of armed conflict, sabotage, acts of hostility, civil war, insurrection;

---
2) natural phenomena of an exceptional, inevitable, and uncontrollable nature;
b) does not apply to environmental damage or an imminent threat of such damage caused by an incident for which liability or compensation falls within the scope of one of the international conventions listed in Annex 1 to the sixth part of this decree to which the Italian Republic has acceded;
c) does not prejudice the right of the transgressor to limit their liability in accordance with national legislation that implements the convention on the limitation of liability for maritime claims (LLMC) of 1976, or the Strasbourg convention on the limitation of liability in inland navigation (CLNI) of 1988;
d) does not apply to nuclear risks related to the environment nor to the imminent threat of such damage caused by activities governed by the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community or caused by an incident or an activity for which liability or compensation falls within the scope of one of the international instruments listed in Annex 2 to the sixth part of this decree;
e) does not apply to activities carried out in conditions of necessity and having as their exclusive purpose national defense, international security, or protection from natural disasters;
f) does not apply to damage caused by an emission, an event, or an incident that occurred before the date of entry into force of the sixth part of this decree;
g) does not apply to damage in relation to which more than thirty years have passed since the emission, event, or incident that caused it;
h) does not apply to environmental damage or the imminent threat of such damage caused by pollution of a diffuse nature, if it has not been possible to ascertain in any way a causal link between the damage and the activity of individual operators;
i) does not apply to situations of pollution for which the procedures relating to remediation have actually been started, or remediation of the sites has been started or has occurred in compliance with the rules in force on the matter, unless environmental damage persists after such remediation.

**TITLE II - ENVIRONMENTAL PREVENTION AND RESTORATION**

**Art. 304**
**Prevention action**
1. When environmental damage has not yet occurred, but there is an imminent threat that it will, the interested operator shall, within twenty-four hours and at their own expense, adopt the necessary prevention and safety measures.
2. The operator must precede the interventions of paragraph 1 with a specific communication to the municipality, the province, the region, or the autonomous province in whose territory the harmful event is foreseen, as well as to the Prefect of the province who, within the following twenty-four hours, shall inform the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory. This communication must cover all the relevant aspects of the situation, and in particular the operator's general information, the characteristics of the interested site, the environmental matrices presumably involved, and the description of the interventions to be carried out. The communication, as soon as it is received by the municipality, immediately enables the operator to carry out the interventions of paragraph 1. If the operator does not carry out the interventions of paragraph 1 and the communication of this paragraph, the authority in charge of control or in any case the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall impose an administrative sanction of not less than one thousand euros nor more than three thousand euros for each day of delay.
3. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, at any time, has the right to:
a) ask the operator to provide information on any imminent threat of environmental damage or on suspected cases of such imminent threat;
b) order the operator to adopt the specific prevention measures considered necessary, specifying the methodologies to be followed;
c) adopt the necessary prevention measures himself.
4. If the operator does not comply with the obligations provided for in paragraph 1 or paragraph 3, letter b), or if he cannot be identified, or if he is not required to bear the costs under

---
of the sixth part of this decree, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory has the right to adopt the necessary measures for the prevention of the damage himself, approving the note of expenses, with the right of recourse exercisable against whoever has caused or contributed to causing the expenses themselves, if identified within five years of the payment being made.

**Art. 305**
**Environmental restoration**
1. When environmental damage has occurred, the operator must communicate without delay all relevant aspects of the situation to the authorities of Article 304, with the effects provided for therein, and, if applicable, to the other competent state authorities, in any case interested. The operator also has the obligation to immediately adopt:
a) all practicable initiatives to control, contain, eliminate, or manage in another way, with immediate effect, any factor of damage, in order to prevent or limit further environmental prejudice and harmful effects on human health or further deterioration to services, also on the basis of the specific instructions formulated by the competent authorities regarding the necessary prevention measures to be adopted;
b) the necessary restoration measures of Article 306.
2. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, at any time, has the right to:
a) ask the operator to provide information on any damage that has occurred and on the measures he has immediately adopted pursuant to paragraph 1;
b) adopt, or order the operator to adopt, all appropriate initiatives to control, contain, eliminate, or manage in another way, with immediate effect, any factor of damage, in order to prevent or limit further environmental prejudice and harmful effects on human health or further deterioration to services;
c) order the operator to take the necessary restoration measures;
d) adopt the said measures himself.
3. If the operator does not comply with the obligations provided for in paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, letter b) or c), or if he cannot be identified or is not required to bear the costs under the sixth part of this decree, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory has the right to adopt these measures himself, approving the note of expenses, with the right of recourse exercisable against whoever has caused or in any case contributed to causing the expenses themselves, if identified within five years of the payment being made.

**Art. 306**
**Determination of measures for environmental restoration**
1. The operators shall identify the possible measures for environmental restoration that are compliant with Annex 3 to the sixth part of this decree and present them for approval to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory without delay and in any case no later than thirty days from the harmful event, unless he has already adopted urgent measures, pursuant to Article 305, paragraphs 2 and 3.
2. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall decide which restoration measures to implement, in order to ensure, where possible, the achievement of complete environmental restoration, and shall evaluate the opportunity to reach an agreement with the interested operator in compliance with the procedure of art. 11 of law no. 241 of 7 August 1990.
3. If a plurality of cases of environmental damage has occurred and the competent authority is not able to ensure the simultaneous adoption of the necessary restoration measures, it may decide which environmental damage should be repaired on a priority basis. For the purposes of this decision, the competent authority shall take into account, among other things, the nature, extent, and severity of the various cases of environmental damage in question, as well as the possibility of natural restoration.
4. In environmental restoration activities, risks to human health are given priority consideration.
5. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory invites the subjects of Articles 12 and 7, paragraph 4, of Directive 2004/35/EC, as well as the subjects on whose properties the restoration measures are to be carried out, to present their observations within ten days and takes them into consideration in the ordinance. In cases of motivated, extreme urgency, the invitation may be included in the ordinance, which in that case may undergo appropriate reforms or be revoked taking into account the state of the works in progress.

---
**Art. 307**
**Notification of preventive and restoration measures**
1. The decisions that impose measures of precaution, prevention, or restoration, adopted pursuant to the sixth part of this decree, are adequately motivated and communicated without delay to the interested operator with an indication of the means of appeal available to him and the relative terms.

**Art. 308**
**Costs of prevention and restoration activities**
1. The operator shall bear the costs of the state initiatives for prevention and environmental restoration adopted according to the provisions of the sixth part of this decree.
2. Without prejudice to paragraphs 4, 5, and 6, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall recover, also through real or bank guarantees on first demand and with the exclusion of the benefit of prior enforcement, from the operator who has caused the damage or the imminent threat, the expenses incurred by the State in relation to the actions of precaution, prevention, and restoration adopted in accordance with the sixth part of this decree.
3. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall decide not to recover all the costs if the necessary expense is greater than the recoverable amount or if the operator cannot be identified.
4. The costs of the actions of precaution, prevention, and restoration adopted in accordance with the provisions of the sixth part of this decree are not borne by the operator if he can prove that the environmental damage or the imminent threat of such damage:
a) was caused by a third party and occurred despite the existence of strictly suitable safety measures;
b) is a consequence of compliance with a mandatory order or instruction issued by a public authority, other than those issued as a result of an emission or an incident attributable to the operator; in this case, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall adopt the necessary measures to allow the operator to recover the costs incurred.
5. The operator is not required to bear the costs of the actions referred to in paragraph 5 undertaken in accordance with the provisions of the sixth part of this decree if he demonstrates that he is not attributable for intentional or negligent conduct and that the preventive intervention for the protection of the environment was caused by:
a) an emission or an event expressly permitted by an authorization granted pursuant to the current legislative and regulatory provisions implementing the legislative measures adopted by the European Community referred to in Annex 5 of the sixth part of this decree, applicable on the date of the emission or event and in full compliance with the conditions provided therein;
b) an emission or an activity or any other way of using a product in the course of an activity that the operator demonstrates was not considered a probable cause of environmental damage according to the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the time of the release of the emission or the execution of the activity.
6. The measures adopted by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in implementation of the provisions of the sixth part of this decree leave unprejudiced the liability and the compensatory obligation of the interested transgressor.

**Art. 309**
**Request for state intervention**
1. The regions, the autonomous provinces, and the local authorities, also associated, as well as the natural or legal persons who are or who could be affected by the environmental damage or who have a legitimating interest in participating in the procedure relating to the adoption of the measures of precaution, prevention, or restoration provided for by the sixth part of this decree, may present to the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, by depositing them at the Prefectures - Territorial Offices of the Government, reports and observations, accompanied by documents and information, concerning any case of environmental damage or imminent threat of environmental damage and request state intervention for the protection of the environment in accordance with the sixth part of this decree.
2. The non-governmental organizations that promote the protection of the environment, of which

---
art. 13 of law no. 349 of 8 July 1986, are recognized as holders of the interest referred to in paragraph 1.
3. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall evaluate the requests for intervention and the observations attached to them concerning cases of damage or threat of environmental damage and shall inform without delay the requesting subjects of the measures taken in this regard.
4. In case of an imminent threat of damage, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in extreme urgency, shall act on the reported damage even before having responded to the requesters pursuant to paragraph 3.

**Art. 310**
**Appeals**
1. The subjects referred to in Article 309, paragraph 1, are entitled to take action, according to general principles, for the annulment of the acts and measures adopted in violation of the provisions of the sixth part of this decree as well as against the failure to act of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory and for compensation for the damage suffered due to the delay in the activation, by the same Minister, of the measures of precaution, prevention, or containment of environmental damage.
2. In the case of paragraph 1, the appeal to the administrative judge, in exclusive jurisdiction, may be preceded by an opposition filed with the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory or sent to its headquarters by registered mail with return receipt within thirty days of notification, communication, or full knowledge of the act. In case of inaction by the Minister, a similar opposition may be proposed within the aforesaid term starting from the expiry of the thirtieth day following the filing of the opposition with the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory.
3. If the opposition has been submitted and not yet the appeal to the administrative judge, the latter is admissible within sixty days from the receipt of the decision to reject the opposition or from the thirty-first day following the submission of the opposition if the Minister has not ruled.
4. The right of the interested party to appeal in an extraordinary manner to the President of the Republic within one hundred and twenty days of notification, communication, or full knowledge of the act or measure that is considered illegal and harmful remains unaffected.

**TITLE III - COMPENSATION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE**

**Art. 311**
**Action for compensation in specific form and for patrimonial equivalent**
1. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall act, also by exercising civil action in criminal proceedings, for compensation for environmental damage in specific form and, if necessary, for patrimonial equivalent, or shall proceed pursuant to the provisions of the sixth part of this decree.
2. Anyone who, by carrying out an illegal act, or by omitting due activities or behaviors, in violation of the law, of a regulation, or of an administrative provision, with negligence, incompetence, imprudence, or violation of technical standards, causes damage to the environment, altering, deteriorating, or destroying it in whole or in part, is obliged to restore the previous situation and, in its absence, to compensation for patrimonial equivalent towards the State.
3. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall provide for the quantification of the damage in application of the criteria set out in Annexes 3 and 4 of the sixth part of this decree. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall provide for the ascertainment of compensatory liability and for the collection of the sums due for patrimonial equivalent with the procedures of title III of the sixth part of this decree.

**Art. 312**
**Preliminary investigation for the issuance of the ministerial ordinance**
1. The preliminary investigation for the issuance of the ministerial ordinance of Article 313 shall take place pursuant to law no. 241 of 7 August 1990.

---
2. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, for the ascertainment of the facts, for the identification of the transgressors, for the implementation of measures to protect the environment and for the compensation for damages, may delegate the Prefect competent for the territory and avail himself, also through specific agreements, of the collaboration of the district State Attorney's Offices, the State Forestry Corps, the Carabinieri, the State Police, the Finance Guard, and any other public entity with adequate competence.
3. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, for the ascertainment of the causes of the damage and for its quantification, to be carried out in application of the provisions contained in Annexes 3 and 4 to the sixth part of this decree, may order, in compliance with the principle of contradiction with the interested operator, a specific technical consultancy carried out by the ministerial offices, by those of paragraph 2 or, taking into account the financial resources provided for by current legislation, by independent professionals.
4. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in order to carry out documentary inspections, verifications, and searches, including in computer equipment, and any other survey deemed useful for the ascertainment of the harmful fact and for the identification of the transgressors, may order the access of his own appointees to the site affected by the harmful fact. The appointees who carry out the access must be provided with a specific authorization indicating its purpose, issued by the head of the office on which they depend. For access to premises that are used as a dwelling or for the exercise of professional activities, it is necessary for the Administration to obtain the authorization of the competent judicial authority. In any case, the holder of the activity or his delegate must be informed of the access to the places of this paragraph, who has the right to be present, also with the assistance of a trusted defender, and to ask for his statements to be recorded.
5. In case of serious indications that suggest that books, registers, documents, writings, and other evidence of the harmful fact are in premises other than those indicated in paragraph 4, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory may request authorization for the search of these premises from the competent judicial authority.
6. The authorization of the competent judicial authority is in any case necessary to proceed, during the access, to personal searches and to the forced opening of sealed envelopes, bags, safes, furniture, closets, and the like, and for the examination of documents and the request for information regarding which professional secrecy has been invoked.
7. A report must be drawn up for each access, from which the inspections and surveys carried out, the requests made to the interested party or his representative, and the responses received, as well as his statements, must result. The report must be signed by the interested party or his representative or must indicate the reason for the failure to sign. The interested party has the right to have a copy.
8. The documents and writings may be seized only if it is not possible to reproduce them or to easily record their relevant content in the report, as well as in case of failure to sign or contestation of the content of the report; however, the agents may always acquire data with their own instruments from mechanized, telematic, electronic, and similar systems.

**Art. 313**
**Ordinance**
1. If, at the end of the preliminary investigation of Article 312, a fact has been ascertained that has caused environmental damage and the person responsible has not activated the restoration procedures pursuant to title V of the fourth part of this decree or pursuant to Articles 304 and following, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, with an immediately enforceable ordinance, shall order those who, on the basis of the said ascertainment, have been found responsible for the fact, the environmental restoration by way of compensation in specific form within a fixed term.
2. If the person responsible for the fact that has caused environmental damage does not provide for the restoration in whole or in part within the ordered term, or the restoration is in whole or in part impossible, or excessively burdensome pursuant to Article 2058 of the civil code, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, with a subsequent ordinance, shall order the payment, within sixty days of notification, of a sum equal to the economic value of the ascertained or residual damage, by way of compensation for pecuniary equivalent.

---
3. With regard to compensation for damage in specific form, the ordinance is issued against the person responsible for the harmful act as well as, jointly and severally, against the person in whose effective interest the conduct causing the damage was held or who objectively benefited from it, avoiding, according to the completed investigation, the economic burden necessary to prepare, in a preventive manner, the works, equipment, precautions, and to maintain the behaviors provided for as mandatory by the applicable rules.
4. The ordinance is adopted within the peremptory term of one hundred and eighty days starting from the communication to the subjects of paragraph 3 of the start of the investigation, and in any case within the term of forfeiture of two years from the notice of the fact, unless the environmental restoration is in progress by the care and expense of the transgressor. In this case, the same terms start from the unjustified suspension of the restoration works or from their conclusion in case of incomplete repair of the damage. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory shall provide for the attestations concerning the suspension of the works and their incompleteness with a specific act of ascertainment.
5. Within the terms provided for by paragraphs 1 and 3 of art. 2947 of the civil code, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory may adopt further measures against subsequently identified transgressors.
6. In the case of damage caused by subjects subject to the jurisdiction of the Court of Auditors, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, instead of ordering the payment of the compensation for patrimonial equivalent, shall send a report to the Regional Prosecutor's Office at the jurisdictional Section of the Court of Auditors competent for the territory.
7. In the case of occurred compensation for the damage, new interventions involving an increase in costs for the interested operator are excluded, following a concurrent action by an authority other than the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory. The right of the subjects damaged by the fact that produced environmental damage, in their health or in their property, to take legal action against the person responsible for the protection of their rights and interests remains unaffected.

**Art. 314**
**Content of the ordinance**
1. The ordinance contains the specific indication of the fact, commissive or omissive, contested, as well as the elements of fact considered relevant for the identification and quantification of the damage and the sources of evidence for the identification of the transgressors.
2. The ordinance shall fix a term, also agreed upon with the transgressor in application of art. 11 of law no. 241 of 7 August 1990, for the restoration of the state of the places at his expense, in any case not less than two months and not more than two years, unless a further extension is to be defined in consideration of the extent of the necessary works.
3. The quantification of the damage must include the prejudice caused to the environmental situation with particular reference to the cost necessary for its restoration. Where the exact quantification of the damage not compensable in specific form, or part of it, is not motivably possible, the damage for patrimonial equivalent is presumed, until proven otherwise, to amount to not less than three times the sum corresponding to the administrative pecuniary sanction, or to the criminal sanction, in concrete applied. If a custodial sentence has been served, for the purpose of quantifying the damage of this article, the conversion between it and the sum to be charged as compensation for the damage takes place by calculating four hundred euros for each day of custodial sentence.
4. In case of a conviction sentence in criminal proceedings or the issuance of the measure of Article 444 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the chancellery of the judge who issued the sentence or the measure shall transmit a copy of the same to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory within five days of their publication.
5. The regions, the autonomous provinces, and the other territorial entities, for the purpose of compensation for environmental damage, shall communicate to the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory the administrative sanctions, within ten days of their imposition.
6. The ministerial ordinances of Articles 304, paragraph 3, and 313 indicate the means of appeal and the relative terms.

**Art. 315**

---
**Effects of the ordinance on judicial action**
1. The Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory who has adopted the ordinance of Article 313 may neither propose nor proceed further in the judgment for compensation for environmental damage, without prejudice to the possibility of intervention as an aggrieved person in the criminal judgment.

**Art. 316**
**Appeal against the ordinance**
1. The transgressor, within the peremptory term of sixty days from the communication of the ordinance of Article 313, may appeal to the regional administrative Tribunal, in exclusive jurisdiction, competent in relation to the place where the environmental damage occurred.
2. The transgressor may precede the jurisdictional action with the opposition appeal of Article 310, paragraphs 2 and 3.
3. The transgressor may also appeal to the President of the Republic within one hundred and twenty days of the receipt of the notification or communication of the ordinance or of its full knowledge.

**Art. 317**
**Collection of credits and revolving fund**
1. For the collection of the sums constituting credit of the State pursuant to the provisions of the sixth part of this decree, in the amount determined by the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory or by the judge, the norms of legislative decree no. 112 of 13 April 1999 apply.
2. In the ordinance or in the sentence, it may be ordered, upon request of the interested party who is in difficult economic conditions, that the amounts due be paid in monthly installments not exceeding the number of twenty; each installment cannot in any case be less than five thousand euros.
3. At any time, the debt can be extinguished by a single payment.
4. The failure to pay even a single installment on its due date entails the obligation to pay the remaining amount in a single solution.
5. The sums deriving from the collection of credits in favor of the State for the compensation of environmental damage regulated by the sixth part of this decree, including those deriving from the enforcement of guarantees in favor of the State, assumed as a guarantee of the same compensation, are paid into the State budget, to be reallocated within sixty days, by decree of the Minister of Economy and Finance, to a revolving fund established within a specific basic forecast unit of the budget forecast of the Ministry of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, in order to finance, also by way of advance and, in the latter case, to the maximum extent of ten percent of the expenditure:
a) urgent interventions for the perimeter definition, characterization, and securing of polluted sites, with priority for the areas for which compensation for environmental damage has taken place;
b) decontamination, remediation, and environmental restoration interventions of the areas for which compensation for environmental damage has taken place;
c) remediation and environmental restoration interventions provided for in the national program for the remediation and environmental restoration of polluted sites;
d) activities of the research centers in the field of reductions of greenhouse gas emissions and global climate change.
6. By decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory, adopted in concert with the Minister of Economy and Finance, the operating and access methods to the aforesaid revolving fund are regulated, including the procedures for the recovery of the sums granted by way of advance.

**Art. 318**
**Transitional and final rules**
1. Pending the adoption of the decree of Article 317, paragraph 6, the decree of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory of 14 October 2003 shall continue to apply.
2. The following are repealed:
a) art. 18 of law no. 349 of 8 July 1986, with the exception of paragraph 5;

---
b) art. 9, paragraph 3, of legislative decree no. 267 of 18 August 2000;
c) art. 1, paragraphs 439, 440, 441, 442, and 443 of law no. 266 of 23 December 2005.
3. In implementation of art. 14 of Directive 2004/35/EC, with a decree of the President of the Council of Ministers, adopted on the proposal of the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory in concert with the Ministers of Economy and Finance and of Production Activities, measures are adopted for the definition of suitable forms of guarantee and for the development of the offer of the relative instruments, in order to allow their use by the interested operators for the purposes of fulfilling the responsibilities incumbent on them pursuant to the sixth part of this decree.
4. When environmental damage concerns or may concern a plurality of Member States of the European Union, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory cooperates, including through an appropriate exchange of information, to ensure that a prevention action is taken and, if necessary, a repair of this environmental damage. In this case, when the environmental damage originated in Italian territory, the Minister of the Environment and Protection of the Territory provides sufficient information to the Member States potentially exposed to its effects. If the Minister identifies within the national territory damage whose cause has occurred outside these borders, he shall inform the European Commission and any other interested Member State; the Minister may recommend the adoption of prevention or repair measures and may seek, pursuant to the sixth part of this decree, to recover the costs incurred in relation to the adoption of prevention or repair measures.

This decree, bearing the State seal, will be included in the Official Collection of normative acts of the Italian Republic. It is mandatory for anyone concerned to observe it and have it observed