

--- PAGE 1 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
1 
THE WATER RESOURCES ACT 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
PARTL preliminmy 
1. sort title. 
2. Interpretation. 
PART II. Administratim of Water R e s o m ~  
Water Resources Au!ho?ity 
3. Establishment of Authority. 
4. - 
* 
OfAUthority. 
5. M i I l i S t ~ i d d i r ~ ~  
6. Funds and mourcu of the Authority. 
7. Application of revenues. 
9. Power of Minister to gnatantee loans to Authority. 
10. Power to invest moneys. 
11. Accountsandaudit. 
13. Exemptim from taxes and duties. 
8. 
B O K K O W ~ p O W e r S .  
12. Annaal report, 
Water Resources Advisory Committee 
14. Establishment of Advisory Committee. 
15. Functions of Committee. 
National Water Resources Mmter Plan 
\ 
I 
16. Master Plan. 
PART m. Abstrmtion and Use of Water 
'\ 
17. Application of this Act to abetrrsction and we of water. 


--- PAGE 2 ---

2 
WATER RESOURCES 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
Crown waters. 
Licence required for abstraction. use of water. 
Who may apply. 
Simultaneous application for licence to discharge effluents. 
Regulations relating to licences under this Part. 
Implied term in every licence. 
Approval of works by Authority not guarantee. 
Planning permission still necessary. 
Easemm 
Easement may be claimed. 
Constitution of casement 
Registration, etc. of easement. 
Special POWS Relating to the AbsUmion and Use of Wate 
29. Interconnected, surface and underground water. 
30. Minister may declare emergency area 
3 1. Powers of Authority in emergency area. 
32. Sources of supply reserved for public purposes. 
33. Licences for use of reserved sources of supply. 
PART W. Control and Protection of Underground Water 
Control of Well-Drilling 
34. Consent of Authority to search for underground water. 
35. Duty on welldriller to be licensed, etc. 
36. Welldrilling and mining operations. 
37. Waste of underground water from wells unlawful. 
38. Authority may determine safe yield of aquifers. 
Special Power of Authority in relation to Aquifers 
PART V. Control of Water Quality 
Water Quality Control Plans 
39. Water Quality colltrol Areas. 
40. Water Quality Control Plan. 
indusion d 
bhis pruge b wthurized by LH. 
96 / 19981 


--- PAGE 3 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
3 
PART VI. Supplementary Powers of Authority 
41. Enforcement of regulatory controls. 
42. Supplementary provisions as to enforcement. 
PART VII. General 
43. Appeal. 
44. Penalties. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
5 2  
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
Suspension of licence additional penalty. 
Fees and charges. 
Offences by corporations. 
Agencies to consult Authority prior to giving decisions. 
Regulations. 
Modification of laws. 
Act applies to Crown. 
PART VIII. Savings and Transitional Provisions 
Entitlement to licence in certain circumstances. 
Provisions relating to special agreements. 
Vesting of property previously held by the Underground Water 
Saving of rights of existing staff of Underground Water Authority. 
Construction of references to Underground Water Control Act. 
Authority. 
SCHEDULES. 
hd&n of this 'page b authorized by L.N. 961 19981 


--- PAGE 6 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
7 
PART 11. Administration of Water Resources 
3.-(1) There is hereby established for the purposes of b t a ~ s h -  
this Act a body to be called the Water Resources Authority A ~ ~ ~ I o I - B ~ ~ .  
which shall be a body corporate to which the provisions of 
section 28 of the Interpretation Act shall apply. 
(2) The provisions of the First Schedule shall have 
effect in relation to the constitution and operations of the 
Authority and otherwise in relation thereto. 
Water Resources Authority 
ment 4 
4.41) It shall be the duty of the Authority to regulate, %=;.Of 
allocate, conserve and otherwise manage the water resources 
of Jamaica. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Author- 
ity may, for the purposes of performing any of its functions 
under this Act, do anything and enter into any transaction 
which, in the opinion of the Authority, is necessary to 
ensure the proper performance of its functions. 
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener- 
ality of the provisions of subsections (1) and (2), the Au- 
thority may- 
(U) obtain, compile, store and disseminate data con- 
cerning the water resources of Jamaica; 
(b) exercise planning functions as provided in this Act 
in relation to the Master Plan and Water Quality 
Control Plans; 
(c) allocate water resources in conformity with the 
provisions of this Act; 
(d) control the quality of water resources in accord- 
ance with the provisions of this Act; 
(e) provide to any departmenlt or agency of Govern- 
ment, at its request, technical assistance in respect 
hmclusbm &&is 
prrge ils &rized 
by L.N. %/1W8] 


--- PAGE 7 ---

8 
WATER RESOURCES 
of any projects, programmes or activities which 
relate to the development, conservation and use of 
water resources; 
(f) perform such other functions relating to the man- 
agement, conservation and use of water resources 
as may be assigned to it by or under this Act or 
any other enactment. 
5. The Minister may, after consultation with the chair- 
man of the Authority, give to the Authority such directions 
of a general character as to the policy to be followed by the 
Authority in the performance of its functions as appear to 
the Minister to be necessary in the interests of Jamaica and 
the Aucthority shall give effeot to any such directions. 
6. The funds and resources of the Authority shall consist 
!(a) such sums as may be provided annually for the 
purpose in the Estimates of Revenue and Expen- 
diture of Jamaica; 
of- 
(b) s m s  borrowed by the Authorilty pursuant to sec- 
tion 8 for the purpose of meeting any of its obliga- 
tions or discharging any of its functions; 
(c) all other sums or property which may in any 
manner become payable to or vested in the Au- 
thority in resped of any matter incidental to its 
functions. 
7. The revenues of the Authority shall be applied for the 
purposes authorized by this or any other law in relation to 
the functions of the Authority. 
inclusion d 
&is p ~ g e  
5s au&onzed by L.N. 96 / 19981 


--- PAGE 8 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
9 
8. The Authority may, within such limits as the Minister EeF 
responsible for finance may fix from time to time, borrow 
money for the purpose of enabling it to perform its funotions 
under this Act. 
9.--(1) With the approval of the House of Representa- ;=?& 
tives, the Minister responsible for finance may guarantee, marantee 
in such manner and on such conditions as he may think fit, ~ - i ~ .  
the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest 
on any authorized borrowings of the Authority. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, where 
any loan is, pursuant to subsection (l), guaranteed by the 
Minister responsible for finance, the repayment of the prin- 
cipal moneys and interest represented by the loan so guaran- 
teed shall, during the continuance of such guarantee, be a 
first charge upon such revenue and assets of the Authority 
as shall be specified by that Minister. 
(3) Where the Minister responsible for finance is satis- 
fied that there has been default in the repayment of any prin- 
cipal moneys or in the payment of interest guaranteed under 
the provisions of this section, he shall direct the repayment 
or, as the case may be, the payment, out of the Consolidated 
Fund and assets of Jamaica, of the amount in respect of 
which there has been such default. 
loans to 
(4) The Authority shall make to the Accountant- 
General, at such times and in such manner as the Minister 
responsible for finance may direct, payments of such amounts 
as may be so directed in or towards repayment of any sums 
issued in fulfilment of any guarantee under this seotion, and 
payments of interest on what is outstanding for the time 
being in respect of any sums so issued at such rate as that 
Minister may direct, and different rates of interest may be 
directed as respects different sums and as respeots interest 
for different periods. 
[The inclusi~m rd this page is a&horized )by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 9 ---

10 
WATER RESOURCES 
Power ta 
inwest 
moneys. 
10. All moneys of the Authority not immediately required 
to be expended in the meeting of any obligations or the dis- 
charge of any functions of the Authority may be invested 
in such securities as may be approved either generally or 
specifically by the Minister and the Authority may, with the 
approval of the Minister, sell all or any of such securities. 
Acawnts 
11.41) The Authority shall keep proper accounts and 
other records in relation to the business of the Authority and 
shall prepare annually a statement of accounts in a form 
satisfactory to the Minister, being a form which shall con- 
form to the best commercial standards. 
and adit. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited 
within six months after the close of each financial year or 
within such other period as the Minister may direot by an 
auditor or auditors appointed annually by the Authority 
and approved by the Minister. 
(3) So soon as the accounts of the Authority have 
been audited, the Authority shall send the statement of its 
accounts referred to in subsection (1) to the Minister, 
together with a copy of any report made by the auditors on 
that statement or on the accounts of the Authority. 
(4) The auditors’ fees and any expenses of the audit 
shall be paid by the Authority. 
(5) The Auditor-General shall be entitled, at all 
reasonable times, to examine the accounts and other records 
in relation to the business of the Authority. 
AanlPal 
12.41) The Authority shall, as soon as practicable after 
the end of each financial year, cause to be made and shall 
transmit to the Minister, a report dealing generally with the 
activities of the Authority during the preceding financial 


--- PAGE 12 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
13 
organization as the Authority thinks appropriate 
or from any agency or department of Government 
or local authority; 
(c) undertake such studies and investigations and carry 
on such other activities as may be necessary or 
relevant to the preparation of the Master Plan. 
(4) In preparing the draft Master Plan the Authority 
shall take such steps as are practicable to co-ordinate the 
Master Plan with the plans of any department or agency of 
Government for national or regional economic and physical 
development and shall have regard to any plans relating to 
the development of water resources by any person or organi- 
zation other than a department or agency of Government. 
(5) The Authority shall ensure that the draft Master 
Plan- 
(a) identifies objectives for the development, conserva- 
tion and use of the water resources of Jamaica, 
taking into account all relevant considerations in- 
cluding the desirability of economic efficiency, the 
proteotion of the health, safety and welfare of per- 
sons, the protection or encouragement of economic 
activity and the proteution of the environment and 
the enhancement of environmental values; 
(b) identifies, describes and inventories in relation to 
Jamaica- 
f(i) the occurrence, quantity, availability and 
quality of water; 
(ii) the current uses of water; and 
(iii) the activi'ties which are dependent on, 
affected by, or related to water and its uses; 
(c) identifies and describes in relation to Jamaica, the 
projected needs for water and recommends the pro- 
jects, programmes and other steps which, in view 
~ ~ h c ~ o f # i s p a g e t s B a u ~ e d  
byL.N. %/19!28] 


--- PAGE 13 ---

14 
WATER RESOURCES 
of such needs, should be undertaken in respect of 
the development of water resources and the control, 
abstraction and storage of water and the supply, 
distribution, drainage and disposal thereof; 
(d) having regard to the current and projaed needs 
for water identified pursuant to paragraph (c) and 
the projects, programmes and other steps recom- 
mended under that paragraph, indicates the objec- 
tives in relation to water quality whether in respect 
of Jamaica generally or in respect of regions there- 
of, and the programmes designed to achieve those 
objectives; 
(e) indicates and evaluates the ways in which all pro- 
jects and programmes proposed in the draft Master 
Plan in respect of the current and projected use of 
water will achieve the objectives identified pursuant 
to paragraph (a). 
(6) If he is satisfied with the draft Master Plan, the 
Minister- 
(a) shall, subject to affirmative resolution, by notice 
published in the Gazette declare it to be the ap- 
proved Master Plan and shall specify in such notice 
the date on which the Master Plan shall take effect; 
(b) shall cause the approved Plan to be published in the 
Gazette; 
(c) shall cause such Plan to be made available to all 
departments and agencies of Government and to 
local authorities and any other body which the 
Minister thinks may be affected by the Master Plan 
in view of the nature of the activities in which that 
body is engaged; and 
(d) shall cause a notice to be published in at least one 
issue of a daily newspaper circulating in Jamaica 
stating that the approved Plan is available to the 
me inclusion 0b.this ipge B authorized by L.N. 
96 / 19981 


--- PAGE 14 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
15 
general public for inspection at the office of the 
Authority on payment of the prescribed fee. 
(7) The Authority shall cause to be prepared and 
shall submit to the Minister for approval an annual revision 
of the whole or any part of the Master Plan which is for 
the time being in effect pursuant to this section; and for 
the purposes of such revision, the Authority and the Min- 
ister shall have the like functions as are exercisable under 
this section in relation to the draft Master Plan. 
(8) The Minister shall, not later than six months 
after the completion of an annual revision of the whole or 
any part of the approved Master Plan, cause a copy of that 
revision to be laid on the Table of the House of Representa- 
tives and on the Table of the Senate. 
(9) A failure on the part of any person to observe 
any provision of the Master Plan which is for the time being 
in operation shall not of itself render him liable to any pro- 
ceedings; but in any proceedings before the Authority any 
provision of the Master Plan which appears to the Authority 
and any failure on the part of any person to observe that 
provision, shall be taken into account by the Authority in 
determining that question. 
PART 111. Abstraction and Use of Water 
17.--(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any Am1i-n 
existing enactment, the abstraction and use of water in zizez- 
Jamaica and the construction of any works for such abstrac- tim and use 
tion and use shall be governed by the provisions of this Act, 
and accordingly, nothing in any existing enaotment shall be 
construed as derogating from any provision made by or 
pursuant to this Act. 
(2) In subsection (1) “existing enactment” means an 
enactment which is in force on the appointed day. 
of waiter. 


--- PAGE 15 ---

16 
WATER RESOURCES 
cnrwn 
waters. 
Licence 
use of 
mter. 
m o  may 
tupPlY. 
18. All water resources that were vested in the Crown 
immediately before the appointed day shall remain so vested 
on and after the appointed day. 
19.--(1) Subjeot to subsection (2), no person shall- 
‘(U) abstract and use water; or 
(b) construct or alter or cause to be constructed or 
altered any works for the abstraction and use of 
water, 
except under and in accordance with a licence for the pur- 
pose granted to him by the Authority under this Act. 
(2) A person may abstract and use water without a 
licence- 
(a) if he has a right of access to the source of water; 
and 
(b) if the water is required only for domestic use. 
20. A person requiring a licence pursuant to section 19 
shall make an application in writing to the Authority in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed. 
21.41) Where a licence is required pursuant to section 
19 and the use of the water to which that licence relates 
will or is likely to result in the discharge of effluents, then, 
an application shall also be made to the relevant authority 
for a licence to discharge effluents and a copy of that applica- 
tion shall accompany the application for a licence required 
pursuant to section 19. 
(2) In subseotion (1) “relevant authority” means the 
Natural Resources Conservation Authority or such other 
body as the Minister may prescribe by notice published in 
the Gazette. 
inclwh d 
M O  ib -zed 
by L.N. 
96 I19981 


--- PAGE 16 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
17 
22. The provisions of regulations made under this Act 
shall have effect in relation to the grant, suspension and re- lice- 
vocation of licences under this Part and otherwise in rela- writ. 
tion to such licences. 
under this 
23. It shall be an implied term of every licence granted irruplied 
under this Act to abstract and use water that the Authority 
may by notice in writing addressed to the holder of the licence* 
licence impose, in accordance with section 31, such re- 
strictions as it thinks necessary if the area relevant to the 
operation of the licence is, pursuant to section 30, declared 
to be an emergency area. 
2 4  Where in relation to the grant of a licence to abstract -of 
and use water, any condition is imposed by the Authority as Au&ority 
to the construation of works, the fact that the Authority is ;trancaed. 
satisfied that the works have been properly constructed shall 
not operate- 
(a) to imply a guarantee by the Government or the 
Authority that the works have been properly de- 
signed or constructed; or 
wlorks by 
(b) to support or justify any claim against the Gov- 
ernment or the Authority or any officer of the 
Government or the Authority in connection with 
such works. 
n 
planning permission where such permission is required under n-ry. 
25. The grant under this Act of a licence to abstract and P- 
use water does not dispense with the necessity of obtaining 
the Town and Country Planning Act or any other enact- 
ment in force at the time of the grant, unless otherwise stated 
in that Act or in such other enactment, as the case may be. 


--- PAGE 17 ---

18 
WA TER RESOURCES 
Easement 
Easemat 
m
Y
 
be 
claimed. 
Constitution 
of aaswllelmt 
Rqistra- 
tion, etc. of 
&med. 
Inter- 
conllectad, 
surface and 
under- 
ground 
water. 
26. A person who- 
(a) under this Act is an applicant for or is the holder of 
a licence to abstract and use water; and 
(b) requires an easement, 
shall satisfy the Authority that the owner of the land over 
which the easement is required has agreed to the grant of 
such easement. 
27.-(1) 
An easement referred to in section 26 may be 
constituted by written agreement between the holder of the 
licence and the owner of the land over which the easement 
is required and shall contain a provision that the easement is 
not revocable by the person granting it without the approval 
of the Authority. 
(2) In this section “owner” in relation to land in- 
cludes an occupier having such authority over the land as 
would empower him to grant an easement. 
28.-(1) 
The creation or discharge of an easement shal’l 
be registered by the Registrar of Titles or recorded by the 
Deputy Keeper of the Records in accordance with regula- 
tions made under this Act. 
((2) Until it is registered or recorded pursuant to sub- 
section (l), an easement is binding only on the persons who 
were the original parties to the agreement. 
Special Powers Relating to the Abstraction and Use of Water 
29.-(1) 
The Authority may deal with surface water and 
underground water as one source of supply if, in its opinion, 
the surface water and underground water are so inter- 
connected as to constitute one source of supply. 
(2) In any area declared to be an emergency area 
pursuant to section 30 the Authority may, if it is of the 
[Tbs inclusion of ,this pige h albthodzcd by L.N. 961 19981 


--- PAGE 18 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
19 
opinion that it is in the best interest of the management of 
the water resources of Jamaica, deal with ail licences under 
this Act to abstract and use water from an inter-connected 
source of supply on the basis of equality of standing before 
the Authority. 
30.-(1) 
On the recommendation of the Authority the E$iz,are 
Minister, after consultation with the Advisory Committee, @m-cy 
may by order declare an area to be an emergency area if 
he is satisfied that, on account of drought or any other 
condition or emergency in that area, the supply of water 
from any source is or is likely to become insufficient as re- 
spects its quantity or unsuitable as respects its quality (or 
both) to satisfy the requirements of all licences gran'ted 
under this Act to abstract and use water. 
area. 
(2) An order made under subsection (1) shall be 
published in the Gazette and at least once in each of two 
successive weeks in a daily newspaper circulating in 
Jamaica and may be revoked by the Minister if, having re- 
gard to the recommendation of the Authority and after con- 
sultation with the Advisory Committee, he is of the opinion 
that the circumstances which justified the making of the 
order no longer exist. 
31.-(1) 
The Authority may, in any area declared to be 
an emergency area pursuant to section 30, by notice in m - ~  
writing addressed to the licensees who are entitled under -* 
this Act to abstract and use water, impose such restrictions 
as it thinks necessary in the circmtances, so, however, 
that in imposing such restrictions the Authority shall have 
regard t o -  
(a) the need to satisfy the requirements of public water 
supplies as a matter of priority; and 
me inclfusion of this p g e  is authorized by L.N. 96 19981 


--- PAGE 19 ---

20 
WATER RESOURCES 
(6) subject to subsection (2), the principle that where 
full abstraction and use of water which may be 
abstracted under a licence has been maintained, 
any restriction imposed in respect of such licence 
shall be in proportion to the restriction imposed on 
all other licences in the area so declared. 
(2) If, in any case, the Authority is satisfied that 
there has been misuse or wasteful use of water abstracted 
under a licence granted under this Act, it shall not be bound 
by the provisions of sub-paragraph (b) of subsection (1). 
(3) An appeal shall lie under section 43 (1) from a 
decision made by the Authority under subsection (1) of this 
section. 
(4) Where an appeal is made pursuant to subsection 
(3), it shall not have the effect of suspending or otherwise 
affecting the operation of a notice served under subsection 
(1). 
~
o
b
 
zdyfz 
pu)b.liC 
32.-(1) 
On the recommendation of the Authority the 
Minister, after consultation with the Advisory Committee, 
may by order (hereinafter referred to as “reservation order”) 
reserve the whole or part of a source of supply (hereinafter 
referred to as “reserved water”) for a public purpose and 
may indicate in such order the person or authority entitled 
to use the reserved water. 
(2) The Minister, acting on recommendation and 
after consultation as aforesaid, may, if he is satisfied that 
the circumstances under which a reservation order was 
made in pursuance of subsection (1) no longer justify main- 
taining such order, revoke the order. 
(3) An order made in pursuance of subsection (1) 
and any order made revoking a previous order shall be pub- 
lished in the Gazette, and at least once in each of two suc- 
cessive weeks in a daily newspaper circulating in Jamaica. 
-. 


--- PAGE 20 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
21 
33.-(1) 
If the person or authority entitled to use the z f w s h r  
reserved water applies to the Authority for a licence to ab- r - w d  
stract and use that water, the Authority may by notice in swiy. 
writing addressed to the holder revoke or vary the licence of 
any person who, before such application was made, was 
entitled pursuant to a licence under this Act to abstract and 
use that water. 
(2) Where a licence which is to be revoked or varied 
in pursuance of this section was granted before the date of 
publication of a reservation order made in pursuance of sec- 
tion 32 (l), compensation shall be payable to the holder of 
such licence and regulations made under this Act relating to 
the compensation payable on revocation or variation of a 
licence to accommodate another user shall, mutatis mutan- 
dis, apply in respect of the revocation or variation of a li- 
cence in pursuance of this section. 
(3) Where a licence which is to be revoked or varied 
in pursuance of this section was granted after the date of 
publication of a reservation order made in pursuance of 
section 32 (1) no compensation shall be payable in respect 
of any loss or damage suffered by the holder of a licence 
which has been revoked or varied in pursuance of this 
section. 
sources of 
PART IV. Control and Protection of Underground Water 
34.-(1) 
Subject to subsection (2), no person shall sink, F&zz 
Control ~f Well-Drilling 
construct, enlarge or otherwise alter a well for the purpose to s~anm 
of searching for underground water or for any other pur- gmmd 
pose unless, in accordance with this section, he has obtained -. 
the Authority’s consent to do so. 
(2) Subsection (1) shall not apply in relation to the 
holder of a licence granted under Part 111, the terms of 
which authorize him to sink, construct, enlarge or other- 
wise alter a well. 
for under- 
[The inclusion d this page is authorized bly LN. 
96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 21 ---

22 
WATER RESOURCES 
(3) The provisions of regulations made under this 
Act shall have effect in relation to the grant, suspension and 
revocation of the Aulthority’s consent pursuant to subsec- 
tion (1) and otherwise in relation to such consent. 
(4) The provisions of regulations made under this 
Act requiring a person to keep a journal and to furnish the 
Authorilty with information in connection with any well 
which that person is authorized to sink shall have effect in 
relation to a person who has obtained the Authority’s con- 
sent under this section; but where any person contracts to 
sink a well on land beloging to or occupied by any other 
person, and the execution of the work is under the control 
of the contractor, the contractor and no other person shall 
be deemed to be the person sinking the well for the purposes 
of such provisions as aforesaid. 
Duty on 
to be 
35.-(1) 
No person shall practise as a well-driller except 
under and in accordance with a licence granted by the Au- 
thority in accordance with regulations made under this Act 
governing the licensing of persons as well-drillers. 
(2) It shall be the duty of any person who is the 
holder of a well-driller’s licence and who contracts to sink, 
construct, enlarge or otherwise alter a well on behalf of any 
person to satisfy himself prior to commencing any work 
that the other person- 
(a) holds a valid licence under this Act to abstract and 
use water; 
(b) has obtained written consent from the Authority in 
pursuance of section 34 (1); or 
(c) is, by virtue of the provisions of section 19 (2), 
entitled to abstract and use water without a licence. 
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1) a person shall 
be regarded as practising as a well-driller if he sinks, con- 
structs, enlarges or otherwise alters a well for hire or reward 
well-driller 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 22 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
23 
whether or not such sinking, construction, enlargement or 
alteration occurs on one occasion only. 
36.-(1) 
Any person who proposes to construct any new w~ll+i!ling 
and mrnmg 
boring, or to enlarge or otherwise alter any existing boring, omtions. 
for the purpose of searching for or extracting minerals or 
other substances under a relevant statute shall take such 
measures as may be required by the Authority for conserv- 
ing underground water, being measures which, in the opinion 
of the Authority, will not interfere with the winning of 
minerals or other substances and shall submit to the Au- 
thority, at its request, such data or other information as the 
Authority may require in connection with such construction 
or enlargement, as the case may be. 
(2) Information required pursuant to subsection (1) 
shall be forwarded to the Authority within thirty days of the 
date of a request therefor or such longer period as the 
Authority may allow. 
(3) In this section, “relevant statute” means- 
(a) the Mining Act; 
(b) the Petroleum Ad; or 
(c) any other Act which regulates the winning of sub- 
stances. 
37.-(1) 
Subject to subsection (2), no person shall cause =kd 
or allow any underground water to run to waste from any vmterfrwn 
well or other work except for the purpose of testing the hhl. 
extent or quality of the supply or cleaning, sterilizing, exam- 
ining or repairing the well or other work. 
(2) Where underground water interferes or threatens 
to interfere with the execution or operation of any under- 
ground works, it shall not be unlawful under this subsection 
to cause or allow the water to run to waste so far as may be 
wells m- 
me inclusion of this pa%e is authorized 4y L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 23 ---

24 
WATER RESOURCES 
necessary to enable the works to be executed or operated, 
if no other method of disposing of the water is reasonably 
practicable. 
Special Power of Authority in relation to Aquifers 
38. The Authority shall have power- 
(a) to determine the safe yield of any aquifer for the 
purpose of guiding determinations concerning the 
abstraction and use of water from the aquifer; 
(b) to impose special requirements and restrictions 
with respect to artesian wells, for the purpose of 
preventing waste or contamination of water, or 
loss of artesian pressure; and 
(c) to carry out programmes for the recharge of aqui- 
fers, 
and for the purpose of paragraph (a) “safe yield” means the 
aiiiount of water which may be abstracted from an aquifer 
at a rate which would not reduce the supply to such an 
extent as would render such abstraction harmful to the 
aquifer itself or to the quality of the water and would not 
affect the economic feasibility of other abstractions. 
PART V. Control of Water Quality 
Water Quality Control Plans 
39. If the Minister, on the recommendation of the Au- 
thority and after consultation with the Advisory Committee, 
is satisfied that a plan of co-ordinated measures for the pro- 
tection of the quality of water resources in any area is 
necessary in the public interest, he may make an order de- 
fining the area in question, and declaring the area to be a 
Water Quality Control Area. 
[The inclusion d this page is authorized ljy LN. 
96/1%] 


--- PAGE 24 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
25 
40.-(1) 
In respect of each area declared a Water Quality W s w  
Control Area, the Authority shall prepare and submit to amtd 
the Minister for approval a draft Water Quality Control 
Plan. 
Plan. 
(2) The Minister shall not approve a draft Water 
Quality Control Plan or any revision thereof submitted pur- 
suant to subsection (1) unless the Advisory Committee has 
advised him in respect thereof, but if the Advisory Commit- 
tee does not give its advice within ninety days of the date of 
a request therefor or within such longer period as the Min- 
ister may in any case allow, the Minister may act without 
such advice. 
(3) For the purpose of preparing a draft Water 
Quali'ty Control Plan in pursuance of subsection (11, the 
Authority shall- 
(a) conduct such studies and investigations and con- 
sult with such persons, as it thinks appropriate, 
and any body or authority exercising functions in 
relation to water quality; 
(b) cause to be published in the Gazette and at least 
once in each of two successive weeks in a daily 
newspaper circulating in Jamaica, a notice indi- 
cating the proposals and specifying the time and 
place at which, and subjeot to subsection (4), the 
period during which, representations may be made 
in respeot of such proposals; and 
(c) hold such hearings or local inquiries as it considers 
appropriate. 
(4) The period specified in a notice pursuant to 
paragraph (b) of subsection (3) shall not be less than thirty 
days commencing on the date on which the notice was first 
published in such daily newspaper as aforesaid. 
me inclusion of .this page iS au6horized by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 25 ---

26 
WATER RESOURCES 
(5) In respect of any Water Quality Control Area, 
a draft Water Quality Control Plan shall, taking into ac- 
count the provisions of the Master Plan that are in effect- 
inventory and identify present and anticipated uses 
of waters in the area; 
inventory and identify present and anticipated dis- 
charges of waste into any waters in the area, on 
the ground or into the ground; 
inventory controlled land uses; 
identify environmental and scenic values to be 
protected; 
fix such ambient water quality standards as will 
satisfy the needs identified in pursuance of para- 
graphs (a) and (4; 
establish critical locations where the standards 
fixed in pursuance of paragraph (e) are required 
to be met. 
(6) In addition to the matters listed in subsection 
(3, 
a draft Water Quality Control Plan shall make provision 
for- 
(a) the achievement of the ambient water quality 
standards fixed in pursuance of paragraph (e) 
of subsection ((5) including, if appropriate and 
desirable, a timetable for the scheduled achieve- 
ment of those standards, if the waters in respeut 
of which ambient water quality standards are in 
effect fail to meet those standards at such critical 
locations as are established in pursuance of para- 
graph (f) of subsection (5); and 
(b) the maintenance of such ambient water quality 
standards as have been fixed in pursuance of 
paragraph (e) of subsection (3, 
if the waters in 
respect to which those standards have been fixed 
meet the standards at such critical locations as are 
- 
p
c
 
inclusion d this page is authorized ,b@ LN. 
961 lq981 


--- PAGE 26 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
27 
established in pursuance of paragraph (0 of sub- 
section (5). 
(7) If he is satisfied with a draft Water Quality Con- 
(a) shall, subject to negative resolution, by notice pub- 
lished in the Gazette declare it to be an approved 
Water Quality Control Plan and shall specify in 
such notice the date on which the Water Quality 
Control Plan shall take effect; 
(b) shall cause the approved Plan to be published in 
the Gazette; 
(c) shall cause such Plan to be made available to all 
departments and agencies of Government respon- 
sible for administering controlled land uses, to 
any local authority for the area affected by the 
Plan, having responsibility for administering con- 
trolled land use in that area, and to any other body 
which the Minister thinks may be affected by the 
Plan in view of the nature of the activities in which 
that body is engaged; and 
(d) shall cause a notice to be published in at least one 
issue of a daily newspaper circulating in Jamaica 
stating that the approved Plan is available to the 
general public for inspection at the office of the 
Authority on payment of the prescribed fee. 
(8) The Authority shall cause to be prepared and 
shall submit to the Minister for approval an annual revision 
of any Water Quality Control Plan or of any part thereof 
and for the purposes of such revision, the Authority and the 
Minister shall have the like funotions as are exercisable 
under this section in relation to the preparation of the draft 
Water Quality Control Plan. 
(9) The Minister shall not later than six months after 
the completion of an annual revision of the whole or any 
trol Plan, the Minister- 
[The inCluSitm of this page is auehorized & L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 27 ---

2a 
WATER RESOURCES 
part of the approved Water Quality Control Plan, cause a 
copy of that revision to be laid on the Table of the House of 
Representatives and on the Table of the Senate. 
(10) A failure on the part of any person to observe 
any provision of a Water Quality Control Plan which is for 
the time being in operation, shall not of itself render him 
liable to any proceedings; but in any proceedings before 
the Authority, any provision of a Water Quality Control 
Plan which appears to the Authority to be relevant to any 
question arising in the proceedings, and any failure by any 
person to observe that provision, shall be taken into 
account by the Authority in determining that question. 
(1 1) In this section “controlled land use” means any 
use of land and the natural resources therein which is 
regulated under any of the following statutes, that is to say- 
(a) the Forest Act; 
(b) the Watersheds Protection Act; 
(c) the Mining Act; 
(6) the Petroleum Act; 
(e) the Quarries Control Act; 
(f, the Rural Agricultural Development Act; 
(g) the Town and Country Planning Act; and 
(h) any other enactment in force for the time being, 
which regulates the development, conservation and 
use of land and the natural resources therein. 
PART VI. Supplementary Powers of Authority 
hhrcanent 
controls. 
41.-(1) 
If it appears to the Authority that- 
of rqgdatomy 
(a) any water has been or is being abstracted and used, 
or any works instrumental thereto have been or 
are being constructed, or altered, without a valid 
licence under this Act; or 
[The inclusion d this page is authorized by L.N. %/1%B] 


--- PAGE 28 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
29 
(b) any borings have been or are being carried out for 
the purpose of searching for underground water, 
without a written consent under this Act; or 
(c) any conditions subject to which a licence or con- 
sent to carry out any of the activities referred to in 
paragraph (a) or ~(b) (hereinafter referred to as 
“water-related activities”) have not been or are not 
being complied with, 
the Authority may, pursuant to this section, serve on a per- 
son described in subsection (2) a notice (hereinafter referred 
to as an “enforcement notice”). 
(2) The person referred to in subsection (I) is a 
person- 
(a) who appears to have carried out or to be carrying 
out an activity in respect of which a licence or con- 
sent is required under this Act, without a valid 
licence or consent; or 
‘(b) who appears to have failed to comply with any of 
the conditions subject to which the licence or con- 
sent had been granted, 
whichever is appropriate in any particular case. 
under subsection (1)- 
(3) The Authority shall specify in a notice served 
(a) the water-related activity which is alleged to have 
been carried out without a valid licence or con- 
sent as aforesaid or, as the case may be, the matter 
in respect of which it is alleged that any such con- 
ditions as aforesaid have not been complied with; 
and 
(b) the period within which an appeal against its deci- 
sion may be made pursuant to subsection (6), 
and subject to subsection (41, may require such steps as may 
be specified in the notice to be taken within such period as 
- 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. %/I9981 


--- PAGE 29 ---

30 
WATER RESOURCES 
may be so specified for restoring the land and the waters to 
their condition before the water-related activity took place, 
or for securing compliance with the conditions, as the case 
may be, and in particular may, for the purpose aforesaid, 
require the demolition or alteration of any works, the dis- 
continuance of any use of the waters or the carrying out on 
land of any operations. 
~(4) The Authority may, in the notice, order the 
immediate cessation of the offending action if it is of the 
opinion that the circumstances giving rise to the notice are 
such as to warrant an order to that effect. 
(5) If any person on whom an enforcement notice is 
served under this section is aggrieved by the notice, he may 
at any time within the period specified in the notice appeal 
against the notice to the Resident Magistrate’s Court for 
the parish in which the water-related activity to which the 
notice relates takes or took place; and on any such appeal 
the Court in a summary manner- 
(a) if satisfied that permission was granted under this 
Act for the water-related activity to which the 
notice relates, or that no such permission was re- 
quired in respect thereof or that the conditions 
subject to which such permission was granted have 
been complied with, shall quash the notice to which’ 
the appeal relates; 
(b) if not so sati,sfied, but satisfied that the require- 
ments of the notice exceed what is necessary for 
restoring the land and the waters to their condi- 
tion before the water-related activity took place, 
or for securing compliance with the conditions, as 
the case may be, shall vary the notice accordingly; 
(c) in any other case, shall dismiss the appeal: 
Provided that where the enforcement ndice is varied 
or the appeal is dismissed the Court may, if it thinks 
[The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. %/1998] 


--- PAGE 30 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
31 
fit, direct that the enforcement notice shall not take effect 
until such date (not being later than twenty-eight days from 
the determination of the appeal) as the Court may think fit. 
(6) Where an appeal is made against an enforcement 
notice in which the cessation of the offending activity is 
ordered, the notice shall remain in effect pending the final 
determination or withdrawal of the appeal. 
(7) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a Court 
under subsection (6) may appeal against that decision to the 
Court of Appeal. 
42.-(1) 
Where an enforcement notice takes effect and &!&?;:; 
within the period specified therein or within such extended m m  
period as the Authority may allow any steps required by 
the notice to be taken have not been taken, the Authority 
may enter on the land on which the water-related activity to 
which the notice relates is or was carried on and take those 
steps. 
(2) Any amount reasonably incurred by the Au- 
thority pursuant to subsection (1) may, without limit of 
amount, be recovered as a simple contract debt in the Resi- 
dent Magistrate’s Court of the parish in which the steps 
aforesaid were taken, from the person who- 
(a) being the holder of a licence or consent under this 
Act, has failed to comply with a condition of the 
licence or consent affecting water-related activi- 
ties; or 
(b) has carried out a water-related activity in respect 
of which a licence or consent is required under 
this Act, without a valid licence or consent. 
(3) A person who, having been entitled to appeal to 
the Court under section 41 (7), fails to make such an appeal 
shall not be entitled in proceedings under subsection (2) to 
cdbrwnent. 
[The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 96 / 19981 


--- PAGE 31 ---

32 
WATER RESOURCES 
dispute the validiy of the action taken by the Authority 
upon any ground which could have been raised in such 
appeal. 
(4) Any person who uses water or causes or permits 
water to be used or carries out or causes or permits to be 
carried out any operations in contraven\tion of an enforce- 
ment notice, commits an offence under this Act. 
PART VII. General 
43.41) Subject to the provisions of this section, any 
aggrieved person, as defined in subsection (4), may appeal 
to the Minister, within such time and in such manner as 
may be prescribed, against a decision of the Authority in 
relation to a licence or consent granted under this Act. 
(2) Before determining the appeal the Minister shall 
afford the aggrieved person an opportunity to be heard and 
to be represented by an attorney-at-law or any other person. 
Appeal. 
(3) The Minister may- 
(a) dismiss the appeal and confirm the decision; 
(6) allow the appeal and set aside the decision; 
(c) vary the decision; 
(d) allow the appeal and direct that the matter, the sub- 
ject of the appeal, be determined afresh by the 
Authority. 
(4) For the purposes of this section an aggrieved 
(a) who objects to a decision of the Authority pursuant 
to this Act with respect to his application for a 
licence or consent or to any term or condition 
subject to which the licence or consent, as the case 
may be, is granted; 
(6) who, not being a person described in paragraph 
(a), had pursuant to a provision of this Act made 
person is a person- 
[The inclusion af this pa%e ik authorized by L.N. 96 /1998] 


--- PAGE 32 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
33 
representations to the Authority in respect of an 
application by some other person for the grant of 
a licence or consent, and objects to the Authority’s 
decision in respect to such application on the 
grounds that it is prejudicial to a right or interest 
held by him; 
(c) who- 
(i) is the holder of a licence under this Act; or 
(ii) has obtained the Authority’s consent in re- 
lation to some activity; or 
(iii) is a person who is entitled pursuant to 
section 19 (2) to act without a licence, 
and objects to a decision of the Authority relating 
to or affeding such licence, consent, or relating to 
or affecting such entitlement. 
44.-(1) 
Any person who contravenes the provisions of P~KM?s. 
seotion 19, 34 or 35 (1) or any regulations made under this 
Act in relation to any such provision shall be guilty of an 
offence and shall be liable on summary conviction before a 
Resident Magistrate’s Court to a fine not exceeding fifty 
thousand dollars and in default of payment thereof to impri- 
sonment, with or without hard labour, for a term not exceed- 
ing two years, and where such offence is continued after con- 
viction, such person shall be guilty of a continuing offence 
and in respect of each day during which such offence con- 
tinues shall be liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand 
dollars. 
(2) Any person who conltravenes the provisions of 
section 35 (2), 36 or 37 or any regulations made under 
this Act in relation to such provisions, or who is guilty 
of an offence under section 42, shall be liable on summary 
conviction before a Resident Magistrate to a fine not 
exceeding twenty thousand dollars and in default of 


--- PAGE 33 ---

34 
WATER RESOURCES 
payment thereof to imprisonment with or without hard 
labour for a term not exceeding one year, and where such 
offence is continued after conviction, such person shall be 
guilty of a continuing offence and in respect of each day 
during which such offence continues shall be liable to a fine 
not exceeding ten thousand dollars. 
sumsb* 
of licence 
~ ~ ~ t i o n a i  
pcaalwty. 
45. In addition to the penalties specified in section 44, 
the Authority may suspend or revoke a licence under this 
Act to abstract and use water or to practise as a well- 
driller if the holder of such licence wastes underground water 
in violation of section 37. 
Foes and 
abprgw. 
46.-(1) 
The fees payable to the Authority in relation to 
the grant of a licence or consent or the rendering of any 
service by the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
((2) In addition to such fees as are referred to in sub- 
section (l), such charges as may be prescribed may be im- 
posed in relation to licences to abstract and use water. 
(3) The Minister on the recommendation of the 
Authority may by order published in the Gazette exempt 
any class or classes of persons from the payment, in whole 
or in part, of any fees or charges imposed pursuant to this 
Act. 
(4) Any fees or charges payable to the Authority 
pursuant to this section shall be recoverable by the Au- 
thority as a simple contract debt in a Resident Magistrate's 
Court. 
(5) Without prejudice to the recovery of any fees or 
charges as provided in subsection (4), where any fees 
or charges payable under this Act in respect of a licence 
have not been paid within thirty days of the date of a notice 
in writing demanding them, the Authority may by notice in 
[The inclusion of this ptge k authorized by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 36 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
37 
(3) Until other provision is made pursuant to this 
section, the Regulations set out in the Third Schedule shall g;iule. 
have effect. 
50.-(1) 
The Minister may, by order, with effect from Modidca- 
any date specified in the order, not being earlier than the zbw. 
appointed day, alter any enactment if he considers such 
alteration to be necessary or expedient on account of any- 
thing contained in this Act. 
(2) An order made pursuant to subsection (1) shall 
be subject to affirmative resolution. 
(3) In this section- 
“alter” includes adapt or repeal; 
“enactment” includes any instrument having the force 
of law, but does not include this Act. 
51. This Act binds the Crown. 
Act applies 
tocKvwn. 
PART VIII. Savings and Transitional Provisions 
52.-(1) 
Subject to subsection (3) where a person is, by ~ntiamd 
toliculca 
virtue of any statutory provision in force immediately before incsrlain 
the appointed day, entitled to abstraot and use water, he 
shall, subject to such provisions as may be prescribed, be 
entitled to the grant under this Act of a licence to abstract 
and use water if he applies to the Authority under this sec- 
tion before the expiration of six months commencing with 
the day immediately following the appointed day. 
(2) Subject to subsection (3) and to such provisions 
as may be prescribed, any person who satisfies the Authority 
that throughout a period, not being less than five years 
immediately preceding the appointed day, he openly, 
peaceably and without the permission of any person or 
authority abstracted and used water from a source of supply 
shall, on the basis of the abtraotion and use in such manner 


--- PAGE 37 ---

38 
WATER RESOURCES 
and for such period as aforesaid, be granted a licence by 
the Authority to abstract and use water from that source 
of supply if, pursuant to this subsection, he applies to the 
Authority therefor before the expiration of six months com- 
mencing with the day immediately following the appointed 
day. 
i(3) Nothing in subsection (1) or (2) shall be construed 
as- 
(a) permitting the Authority to issue a licence the terms 
of which are inconsistent with the Master Plan; or 
(b) exempting the licence from any other provisions of 
the Act applicable thereto. 
53.-(1) 
The Authority, if satisfied that it is in the best 
interest of the management of the water resources of 
Jamaica, may serve a notice on any person who is a party 
to a special agreement requiring that person, within such 
time as may be specified in the notice, to enter into nego- 
tiations with the Authority with a view to reaching agree- 
ment as to the adjustments which need to be made to the 
special agreement to render it consistent with the Master 
Plan and, generally, with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In this section “special agreement” means an 
agreement existing between a person holding a mining 
lease under the Mining Act and the Government under 
which that person is entitled to abstract and use water, to 
lay water pipes, to make water courses, ponds, dams or 
reservoirs, to divert water or to do any other act in relation 
to water which, pursuant to this Aot, requires the licence, 
consent or permission of the Authority. 
54. All real and personal property belonging to the 
Underground Water Authority including all moneys stand- 
ing to the credit of, or receivable by, the Underground 
Water Authority pursuant to the Underground Water 
Control Act, now repealed, shall, on and after the appointed 
[The inclusbn c6 this page is k100rized ‘by L!”. 
96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 38 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
39 
day, without any conveyance, assignment or other transfer, 
belong to and be vested in the Water Resources Authority, 
subject to the provisions of this Act and to any enactment 
regulating the management, maintenance, control, super- 
vision and dealing with such property or moneys. 
55.-(1) 
Unless and until other arrangements are made 
rights to 
with the approval of the Minister, and subject to subsection 
(2), all officers and employees holding office or serving under 
the Underground Water Authority on the appointed day L y d  
shall, on and after that day, hold under the Water Resources Authority. 
Authority the like respective offices or employment on the 
same terms and by the same tenure as they held such offices 
or employments under the Underground Water Authority 
before the appointed day. 
(2) Unless and until other provisions are made pur- 
suant to this Act, the Authority may, with the approval of 
the Minister, grant to any officer or employee who is holding 
office or is serving under the Underground Water Authority 
on the appointed day and who has served under that 
Authority in an established capacity as a permanent officer 
or employee, a pension, superannuation allowance or 
gratuity on the same terms and subject to the same con- 
ditions on which such pension, superannuation allowance or 
gratuity would have been granted to such officer or employee 
under the Underground Water Control Act, now repealed, 
and, where he has service with the Water Resources Authority 
under this Act, that service shall be treated as if it were 
service under the Underground Water Authority. 
56. In any enactment or regulations made thereunder 
or in any instrument in writing issued pursuant to a statu- zMzm 
tory power and having effect on or after the appointed t-o-oia- 
day- 
Watu 
(a) any reference to the Underground Water Authority amml 
me inclushim d this page is aulthiorized b L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 39 ---

40 
WATER RESOURCES 
shall be construed as a reference to the Water 
Resources Authority; 
(b) any reference to members of the Undeground 
Water Auth,ority shall be construed as a reference 
to the members of the Water Resources Authority; 
(c) any reference to the powers, duties, liabilities or 
property of the Underground Water Authority 
shall be construed as a reference to the powers, 
duties, liabilities or property of the Water Re- 
sources Authority. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
Constitution and Procedure of Water Resources Authority 
(ktion 3 (2) ) 
1. The Authority shall consist of not less than seven persons or more 
than nine to be a p i n t e d  by the Minister. 
2. The Minister may appoint any person to act temporarily in the 
place of any member of the Authority in the case of the absence or 
inability to act of such member. 
3. (1) The Minister shall appoint one of the members of the Au- 
thority to be the ohhainaan thereof. 
(2) In the case of the absence or imbilit to act at any meeting 
of the chairman, the remaining members of x e Authority shall elect 
one of their number to act as chairman at that meeting. 
4. (1) The appointment of every memiber of the Authority shall be 
evidenced by an instrument in wnting, and such instrument shall state 
the period of office of the member which shall not exceed three years. 
(2) Every member of the Authority shall be eligible for re- 
appointment. 
5. (1) Any member of the Authority, other than the chairman, may 
at any time resign his office by instrument in Writing addressed to the 
Minister and transmitted through the chairman, and from the date of 
the receipt by the Minister of such instrument such member shall 
cease to be a member of the Authority. 
(2) The chairman may at any time resign his office by instrumat 
in writing addressed to the Minister and such resignation shall take 
effect as from the date of the receipt of such instrument by the 
Minister. 
6. The names of all members of the Authority as first constituted 
and every change in the membership thereof shall be published in the 
Gazette. 
[The incluskm d Bhis 'page is authorized hy L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 40 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
41 
7. (1) The seal of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signa- Authentica- 
tures of the chairman or one member of the Authority authorized t~ tionofseal 
act in that behalf, and the secretary of the Authority. 
(2) All documents, other than those required by law to be under 
seal, made by, and all decisions of, the Authority may be signified 
under the hand of the chairman or any member authorized to act in 
that behalf or the secretary of the Authority. 
8. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary P
d
w
 
or expedient for the transaction of business, and such meetings shall *meat- 
be held at such places and times and on such days as the Authority *S. 
shall determine. 
(2) The chairman may at any time call a special meeting of the 
Authority and shall call a special meeting to be held within seven 
days of a written request for that purpose addressed to him by any 
two members of the Authority. 
(3) The chairman or, in the w e  of the absence or inability to 
act of the chairman, the person elected to act as chairman in amrd- 
ance with the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3 shall 
preside at the meetings of the Authority, and when 80 presiding the 
chairman or the person elected as aforesaid to act as chairman. as 
the case may be, shall have an original and a casting vote. 
(4) The quorum of the Authority shall be four members of 
the Authority including the chairman or the person elected to aot as 
chairman as aforesaid. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Authority may 
regulate its own proceedings. 
(6) The validity of any proceedings of the Authority shall not be 
affected by any vacancy among the members thereof or by any defwt 
in the appointment of a member thereof. 
Authority such remuneration, if any (whether by way of salaries. h d  
honorarium, travelling or other allowaices) as the Minister may de- members. 
termine. 
10. (1) The Auithority may appoint and employ at such remunera- ~
~
~
h
t
-
 
tion and on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit, a chief executive meatof 
officer, a secretary and such other officers, ageuts and employees as it o8BCMs-d 
deems necessary for the proper carrying out of the provisions of this savants. 
Act : 
m d  d W -  
ments. 
9. There shall be paid to the chairman and other members of the Reanme=- 
Provided that- 
(a) no salary in excess of the prescribed rate per m u m  shall be 
assigned to any post without the prior approval of the Min- 
ister; and 
(6) no appointment shall be made to any post to which a salary 
in excess of the prescribed rate is assigned without the prior 
approval of the Minister. 
[The indu@ion of trhis page is auihoM ‘bry L.N. 96 / 19981 


--- PAGE 41 ---

42 
WATER RESOURCES 
(2) In subsection (1) the prescribed rate means a rate of one 
hundred and fifty thousand dollars per annum or such higher rate a~ 
the Minister may, by order, prescribe. 
(3) The Governor-General may, subject to such conditions as he 
may impose, approve the appointment of any officer in the service of 
the Government to any office with the Authority and any officer so 
appointed shall, while so employed, in relation to any pension, gratuity 
or other allowance, and in relation to other ri@ts as a public officer, 
be treated as continuing in the service of the Government. . 
(4) It shall be lawful for the Authority, with the approval of the 
Minister to enter into arrangements respecting schemes whether by 
way of insurance policies or otherwise and to make rules in respect 
of medical benefits, pensions, gratuities and other retiring or disability 
benefits or death benefits relating to employees of the Authority and 
such arrangements or rules may include provisions for the grant d 
benefits to the dependeds and the legal personal representatives of 
such employees. 
11. (1) No d o n .  suit, prosecutim or othm proceedings shall be 
brought or instituted personally against any member of the Authority 
in respect of any act done bonu fide in pursuance or execution or in- 
tended execution of this Act. 
(2) Where any member of the Authority is exempt from liability 
by reason only of the provisions of this paragraph, the Authority shall 
be liable to the extent that it would be if that member were an 
employee or agent of the Authority. 
prddm 
of manybm 
OfA* 
riw. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Seaion 14(2) ) 
Constitution a d  \Procedure of Wattr 
Resources Advisory Committee 
M e m k d d p  
ofcan- 
appointed members. 
mitt-. 
1. (1) The Committee shall consist of ex o p i o  membeas and of 
(2) The following shall be ex o@io members of the Committee. 
(U) the Diredor-General of the Planning Institute of Jamaica; 
(b) the chief executive officer, Natural Resources Cowervation 
(c) the chief exeoutive officer of the National Water Oommission; 
(6) the chief executive officer of the National Irrigation Commis- 
(e) the chief executive officer of the Water Remums Authority; 
<n the Government Town Planner. 
(3) The appointed membm shall be such members or persons 
as the Minister may appoint, not exceeding five, to be members of 
F
e
 
inclusion of this p g e  is authorized by L.N. 96 / 19981 
that is to say- 
Authority; 
sion; 


--- PAGE 42 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
43 
the Committee of whom- 
(U) one shall be a person appearing to the Minister to be a re- 
presentative of an organization or society r e p s m ~  
agri- 
cultural interests; 
(b) one shall be a person appearing to the Minister to be a repre- 
sentative of an organization representing consumers; 
(c) one shall be a person appearing to the Minister to be a 
representative of an organization representing the private 
sedor; and 
(d) one shall be a 
erson appearing to the Minister to be a 
representative of t!e 
bauxite mining industry. 
(4) Any ex o w o  member may designate a nominee, in the case 
of absence or inability to act of such member. 
place of any appointed member of the Committee in the m e  of the &-t- 
2. The Minister may appoint any person to aat temporarily in the Tw 
absence or inability to act of such member. 
msnts. 
3. (1) The Minister shall appoint one of the members of the Com- 
mittee to be the chairman thereof. 
(2) In the case of the absence or inability to act at any meeting 
of the chairman, members of the Committee present at such meeting 
shall elect one of their number to act as chairman at that meeting. 
4. (1) The appointment of every appointed member of the corn- Tenure of 
mittee shall be evidenced by an instrument in writing, and swh in- bake. 
strument shall state the period of office of the member which shall 
not exceed three years. 
(2) Every appointed member of the Committee shall be eligible 
for reappointment. 
his office by inshumem in writing addressed to the Minister and th. 
transmitted through the chairman, and from the date of the receipt 
by the Minister of such instrument such member shall cease b be 
a member of the Committee. 
6. The names of all appointed members of the Chmmittee as first mlia&n 
constituted and every change in the membership thereof shall be pub- b f m u u b  
lished in the Gazette. 
w. 
7. (1) The Committee shall meet at such timm as may be neces- -re 
sary or expedient for the transaction of business, and such meetings ! p d w -  
shall be held at such places and times and on such days as the Corn- =W. 
mittee shall determine. 
(2) The chairman may at any time call a special meeting of the 
Committee and shall call a special meeting to be held within seven 
days of a Written request for that purpose addressed to him by any 
two members of the Committee. 
[The indusibn rd this page is aw?horized try L.N. 96/1995] 
5. Any appointed memlber of the Committee may at any time resign R&-- 


--- PAGE 43 ---

44 
WATER RESOURCES 
short title. 
Matters to 
be con- 
sidered by 
Authority. 
(3) The ohairman or, in the case of the absence or inability to 
act of the chairman, the person elected to act as chairman in accord- 
ance with the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3 shall 
preside at the meetings of the Committee, and when so presiding the 
chairman or the person elected as aforesaid to act as chairman, as the 
case may be, shall have an original and a casting vote. 
(4) The quorum of the Committee shall be five members of the 
Committee including the chairman or the person elected to act as chair- 
man as aforesaid. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the Committee may 
regulate its own proceedings. 
(6) The validity of any proceedings of the Committee shall not 
be affected by any vacancy among the members thereof or by any 
defect in the appointment of a mmber thereof. 
(7) The chief executive officer of the Water Resources Authority 
shall serve as secretary to the meetings of the Committee. 
id to the appointed members of the Committee 
8. There shall be 
such oemuneratim i r any, whether by way of salaries, honorarium, 
travelling or &er 
allowances as the Minister may determine. 
THIRD SCHEDULE 
(Saotion 49(3) ) 
THE WATER RESOURCES 
REGULATIONS, 
1995 
PART I. Preliminary 
1. These Regulations may be cited as the Water Resources Regula- 
tions, 1995. 
2. In these Regulations “relevant fee” means such fee as may bc 
prescribed as being payable in relation to an application pursuant to 
the Aot for a licence or consent. 
PART II. Licences to Abstracj and Use Water 
3. (1) An application for a licence required pursuant to section 19 
of the Act shall be made to the Authority in the form set out as Form 
A in the Schedule. 
(2) An application made under paragmph (1) shall be in dupli- 
cate and shall be accompanied by such maps, documents or informa- 
tion as the Authority may require and by the relevant fee. 
(3) On receipt of an application for a licence to abstract and use 
water the Authority shall ad in accordance with the proViskX~~ of 
regulation 24. 
4. In considering an application for a licence to abstract and use 
water the Authority s h d  have regard to- 
(U) the provisions of the Master Plan, including any amendments 
made thereto; 
[The inclusion of this p g c  is authorized by L.N. %/ 19981 


--- PAGE 44 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
45 
(b) any recommendations or representation made pursuant to 
regulation 24 (2) and (3), respectively; 
(c) the consideration that the satisfaction of the demands of public 
water supply is a matter of priority; 
(d) the requirements of the applicant as specified in the applica- 
tion and whether or not he has such financial and technical re- 
sources as may be necessary for the enjoyment of the licence; 
(e) the requirements of other persons who have subsisting licences 
to abstract and use water; 
(f) the safeguarding of public health and the environment; 
(g) the requirements of in-stream uses of the water; and 
(h) the requirements of land drainage. 
5. (1) On consideration of an application the Authority may grant Authority 
=Y lmlla 
or refuse 
(2) Tf the Autbority grants a licence it shall. in addition to notifying licence. 
or refuse to grant a licence. 
the applicant of its decision, inform in writing any person who pursuant 
to regulation 24 (3) has made representations, and that person may re- 
quiE the Authority to furnish to him in writing the reasons for its 
decision. 
(3) If the Authority refuses to grant a licence, it shall state in 
writing the reasons for its decision and inform the applicant of his 
right under the Act to appeal against the decision. 
(4) A licence granted under this regulation- 
(U) shall be in the form set out as Form B in the Schedule; and %hedub. 
(b) shall be for such period as the Authority thinks lit. 
(5) In addition to the implied term specified in section 23 of the 
Act, a licence may contain such terms and conditions as the Authority 
thinks appropriate, including- 
(U) the term that the amount of water authorized to be abstraded 
under the licence may vary according to the availability of ex- 
cess water; or 
(b) the condition that certain works should be constructed within 
a specified time by the person to whom the licence is granted. 
(6) A licence to which paragraph (1) refers may contain different 
(U) the abstraction of water during different periods: 
(b) the abstraction of water from the same source of supply but 
(c) the abstraction of water for use for different purposes. 
(7) Nothing in paragraph (6) shall be construed to preclude a 
grant by the Authority, if it thinks appropriate in any case, of two 
or more licences to the same person to be held concurrently in respect 
of the same source of supply, if the licences authorize the abstraction 
of water at different points of the source or by different means. 
[The incltision of this page is authorized hy L.N. 961 19981 
F
m
 
B. 
provisions relating to- 
at different points or by different means, 
-_-___ 
-~ 
-_ 


--- PAGE 45 ---

46 
WATER RESOURCES 
Liceace not 
transfer- 
able. 
Renewal of 
licence. 
lew>Qtion. 
ac. of 
licena on 
applicarticm 
of Ilansee. 
6. (1) Where a licence is granted under regulation 5 subject to the 
condition that specified works should be constructed within a specified 
period, the Authority may, on the expiration of that period, extend the 
period for the construotion of the works if the person to whom the 
licence was granted so requests. 
(2) On the expiration of the specified period referred to in para- 
graph (1) or of such extended period as may be granted under that 
paragraph or on completion of the works, if that is earlier, the Authority 
shall cause the works to be inspected for the purpose of sa,tisfying 
itself that the works have been properly constructed. 
7. Without prejudice to regulation 16, a licence granted under regu- 
lation 5 is not transferable. 
8. (1) A licence granted under regulation 5 may, on its expiration, 
(a) the person to whom it was granted applies to the Authority 
for renewal of the licence not later than six months before the 
date on which the licence expires; and 
(b) the Authority is satisfied that there has been no material 
change in the circumstances which existed at the time the 
licence was first granted that would justify dealing with the 
application in the manner specified in parapph (2). 
be renewed by the Authority if- 
(2) Where the Authority- 
(a) after the time specified in paragraph (1) (U), receives an appli- 
(6) determines that a material change of circumstances has 
it shall deal with the application as if it were a fresh application made 
under regulation 3 and accordingly, all the provisions of this Part 
relating to the application for a licence shall apply. 
under regulation 5, the Authority may, 
cation for renewal of a licence; or 
occurred since the licence was first granted, 
9. (1) On the application of a person to whom a licence was 
(U) revoke or suspend the licence, subject to such terms and con- 
ditions as the Authority may impose for the purpose of protect- 
ing waters, the environment or public health; or 
(b) subject to paragraph (2), vary the licence. 
(2) In considering an application for the variation d a licence, 
the Authority shall have regard to the matters specified in paragraphs 
(a) to (A) of regulation 4, unless the variation applied for is restricted 
to reducing the quantity of water authorized to be extraded under a 
licence. 
10. (1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Authority may, by notice 
addressed to the person to whom a licence was granted under regulation 
5, revoke the licence or suspend it for such period as the Authority 
thinks appropriate if it is satisfied- 
[The inclusion of this page is authorized b.i L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 46 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
47 
(U) that a breach of any provision of the Act or of these Regula- 
tions or of any term or condition subject to which the licence 
was granted has been committed; or 
(b) that there has been waste or misuse of the water which may 
be abstracted under the licence. 
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Authority shall, 
before revoking or suspending a licence, serve on the person to whom 
the liceiice was granted a notice in writing- 
(U) specifying the breach or default on which the Authority relies 
and requiring him to rentedy it (if it is capable of remedy) 
within such time as may be specified in the notice; and 
(b) inforning him that he may apply to the Authority to be 
heard on the matter within such time as may be specified 
in the notice. 
(3) The Authority shall not be obliged to serve a notice pursuant 
to paragraph (2) in relation to any breach or default if an enforce- 
ment notice pursuant to section 41 of the Act is in effect in relation 
to such breach or default. 
11. (I) Where a licence has been granted under regulation 5 condi- Revocation 
tional on the availability of excess water, then such licence shall have of liceme 
effect only so long as excess water is available for abstraction and mtadfor 
use in accordance with that licence; and accordingly, where it becomes :gi:wa. 
apparent to the Authority that such axces water will become unavail- 
able for abstraction and use under any licence granted as aforesaid, 
the Authority shall notify the holder of the licence in writing of the 
date (not being less than thirty days from the date of service of the 
notice) on which the revocation of the licence shall take cffeot. 
(2) In paragraph (I) “excess water” means such of the flow 
of a river, stream or watercourse which, after satisfying the requirements 
of persons who are entitled under the Aot to abstract and use the water 
of that river, stream or watercourse, would ordinarily run to waste. 
12. (1) Where the Authority is of the opinion that the person to R m m t h .  
whom a liccnce was granted under regulation 5 has not made full use ‘‘$k;;& 
of the licence during the preceding eighteen months, it may by notice foraon-zrss. 
sent by registered mail to that pemn call upon him to show cause in 
writing within sixty days of the date of service of the notice why the 
licence should not be revoked or varied in the manner specified in the 
notice and inforniing him of his right to be heard in the matter within 
the period specified in paragraph (3). 
(2) The Authority shall- 
(U) consider any statement submitted pursuant to paragraph (1); 
(6) if so required, give the person who made the statement an 
W r t u n i t y  to be heard whether in person or by his legal 
representative; and 
(c) thereafter declare whether the licence is revoked, varied in 
such respects as may be specified, or whether it should be 
unchanged . 
[The inclusion of this page is authorized !by L.N. %/I9981 


--- PAGE 47 ---

48 
WATER RESOURCES 
(3) If within sixty days of the date of service of the notice re- 
ferred to in paragraph (1) the person to whom the notice was sent 
does not submit to the Authority a statement in writing of the reasons 
why the licence. should not be revoked or suspended, the Authority 
may declare the licence revoked or varied, as the Authority thinks fit, 
and shall send to such person by registered mail a notice of that declara- 
tion. 
Revocation, 
Vaia%. 
s u s ~ n w n  
dateopher 
uscr. 
13. (1) If the Authority is satisfied that a licence granted under 
regulation 5 should be revoked, suspended or varied so as to acmm- 
modate the needs of another user of the water to which that licence 
relates, it may revoke or vary the licence by notice in writing addressed 
to the holder, and thereupon the licence shall be revoked or shall have 
effect only as so varied, as the case may be. 
(2) A person whow licence has been revoked, suspended or 
varied pursuant to paragraph (1) is entitled to receive compensation 
from the user whose needs for the water have been accommodated and, 
in the absence of agreement between them, the amount of compensa- 
tion shall be determined- 
(U) if the amount claimed does not exceed $lO,OOO by a Resident 
Magistrate’s oourt; or 
(b) in any other case, by a Judge in Chambers. 
Substitution 
Of S W l Y O r  
mum Of 
14. (1) Subiect to any powers exercisable under the A d  in relation 
to an emergency area, if the Authority is of the opinion that it is in the 
best interests of the management, conservation, development and use 
of the water resources it may, in relation to any licence granted under 
regulation 5, suMitute a supply or source of surface water for a supply 
or source of underground water, and vice versa. 
(2) If the substitution is made for the purposes of accommiodating 
the needs of another user of water, the Authvrity in exercising its powers 
under paragraph (1) may stipulate that campensation be paid by that 
person to any person whose licence has been varied on account of the 
substitution and if there is no agreement as to the amount of com- 
pensation, the matter shall be determined in the manner specified in 
regulation 13. 
water. 
Varbtionof 
15. If the Authority considers it necessary in the public interest, it 
licencefor 
may vary a licence to abstract and use water in respect of the points 
cmah Other or methods of abstraction, or both, for the purpose of- 
(a) proteoting the source of water t . ~  which the licence relates 
wmom. 
(b) ensuring the efficient allocation and use of water; or 
(c) proteoting the rights of third panties, 
from depletion or pollution; 
and no liability shall attach to the Authorit by reason of such variation 
nor shall the liability of the holder of the Zcence to pay any charge or 
fee be affeoted. 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. %/19981 


--- PAGE 48 ---

WA TE R RESOURCES 
49 
16. (1) Where any person succeeds to the interwts of a holder of a E 8 - d  
licence granted under t h i s  Paa (hereinafter referred to as “the original L-2 
licensee”) in circumstances, whether on the death of the original licensee. of licensee, 
or otherwise, such that the continued operation of those interests in- 
volves the question of a grant of a licence under this Part in like terms 
as that held by the original licensee, then, subject to paragraph (2). that 
person may apply to the Authority for such a licence. 
(2) An application under paragraph (1) shall be made to the 
Authority within thirty days of the applicant’s acquisition of the 
interest or such longer period, not exceeding ninety days as the Authority 
may in any case allow, and the Authority may, without going through 
the process required by regulation 3 (3) and regulation 4, grant the 
applicant a licence, if it thinks fit, on the terms applicable to the ori- 
ginal licensee. 
(3) Where a person to whom paragraph (1) refers fails to notify 
the Authority within the time allowed under paragraph (2) or the 
Authority does not grant him a licence pursuant to that paragraph, 
such person shall not continue to abstract and use water except under 
and in accordance with a licence granted under regulation 5. 
17. (1) The owner of land over which an easement was conatituited 
by agreement may not terminate the easement unless- 
(a) he serves a notice upon the person to whom the easemeat 
was granted requiring him within thirty days of the notice. 
to show cause to the Authority why the easement should not 
be terminated and such person fails to show any or sufficient 
cause; and 
(b) not later than the date of service of the notice referred to in 
paragraph (U) he notifies the Authority of his intention to 
terminate the easemenlt and submits to the Authority a copy 
of such notice. 
(2) An easement constituted under section 27 of the Act shall, 
if not earlier teminated, expire wi4h the expimtion of the licence 
in relation to which it was granted. 
PART 111. Protection of Underground Ware 
18. (1) An application for the consent of the Authority required a n e a f m  
under section 34 of the Aat to sink, enlarge or otherwise alter a well- 
w a l l a n .  
(a) shall be made to the Authority-in the form set out as Form Eg‘4‘Cf. 
- 
C in the Schedule; and 
(b) shall be accompanied by such maps, documents or inbrma- 
tion as the Authority may require and by the relevant fee. 
(2) The Authority may granct its consent subject to such condi- 
tions as i,t thinks fit or withhold its consent and where the consent is 
granted, it shall be in the form set out at Form D in the Schedule. 
(3) If the Authority withholds its consent. it shall state in writ- 
ing the reasons for its decision and inform the appliant of his right 
under the Act to appeal against that decision. 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. Y6/1998] 
F
O
~
 
D. 


--- PAGE 49 ---

50 
WATER RESOURCES 
(4) A consent granted pursuant to paragraph (2) may be 
(U) at the request in writing of the person to whom the consent 
was given; or 
(b) by the Authority by notice in writing addressed to that 
person, for breach of any requirements of thc Act or these 
Regulations relating to the consent or for the breach of any of 
the cunditions subject to which the consent was granted. 
( 5 )  Before suspending or revoking its consent under sub- 
paragraph (b) of paragraph (4) the Authority shall serve on the person to 
whom the consent was granted a notice in writing- 
(U) specifying the breach on which the Authority relies and re- 
quiring him to remedy it (if it is capable of remedy) within 
such time as may be specified in the notice; and 
(6) informing him that he may apply to the Authority to be heard 
on the matter within such time as may be specified in the 
notice. 
suspended or revoked- 
Well- 
19. (1) An application for a welldriller’s licence required under 
driller’s 
section 35 of the Act may be made to the Authority in the form set 
Iianw. 
out as Form E in the Schedule and shall be accompanied by such 
z F  documents or information as the Authority may require and by the 
relevant fee. 
(2) The Authority may, subject to such terms and conditions as 
it thinks fit, grant a well-driller’s licence or refuse It0 grant it but shall 
grant such a licence if it is satisfied that the applicant has the re- 
quisite professional qualification. 
(3) A licence granted under paragraph (2) shall be in the form 
set out as Form F in the Schedule. 
(4) If the Authority refuses to grant a welldriller’s licence, it 
shall state in writing the reasons for its decision and inform the 
applicant of his right under the Aot to appeal against the decision. 
20. (1) A well-driller’s licence may be suspended or revoked- 
FomF. 
lbwcatbn 
of well- 
drillar’s 
licence. 
(a) at the request of the holder of the licence; or 
(t)) by the Authority by notice in writing addressed to that person 
on account of a breach of any provisions of the Aot or of these 
Regulations relating to the sinking of wells or of any of the 
terms and conditions subject to whi-d the licence was granted. 
(2) Before suspending or revoking the licence of a well-driller 
under sub-pamgmph (b) of paragraph (l), ,&he Authority shall serve on 
him a notice in writing- 
(U) specifying the breach on which the Authority relies and re- 
quiring him to remedy it (if it is capable of remedy) within 
such time as may be specified in the notice; and 
(b) informing him that he may apply to the Authority to be heard 
on the matter within such time as may be specified in the 
notice. 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 96 ‘19981 


--- PAGE 50 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
51 
21. The provisions of regulation 8 shall apply, mufatis mufundis, 'Ren-l 
in respect of the renewal of a well-driller's licence as they apply in 
respect of the renewal of a licence (to abstract and use water. 
licence. 
PART IV. Miscellaneous Powers of Authority 
22. (1) The Authority may, by notice in writing, require any person b
r
m
 
who- 
quire in- 
devices, In- 
(b) is entitled to abstraot and use water without a licence in pur- formation. 
(U) is the holder of a licence issued under regulation 5 to abstract stal& 
of 
and use wa4e-r; or 
suance of the provisions of section 19 (2) of the Act, 
to imtalI and maintain such measuring devices, to keep such records, 
and to furnish in such form and manner and within such time as may 
be specified in the notice, such periodical or other returns or informa- 
tion as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) Any person on whom a notice is served under paragraph (1) 
and who considers that the direotions contained in the notice are 
unreasonable or unduly onerous may make representations to the 
Minister with r e s p t  to them; and the Minister after consultation with 
the Authority may, if it th'ininks fit, dkeot the Authority to revoke or 
modify them. 
(3) Any person who fails to comply with a notice under this 
regulation shall be liable to the penalties specified in section 44 (2) of 
the Act. 
23. (1) Any person duly authorized in writing by the Authority may POW-O~ 
entry, in- 
revisions of the Act or =& 
at any reasonable time enter upon any land for the purpose of- 
(U) monitoring compliance with the 
these Regulations, or with any o s the terms or conditions -leS. 
subject to which a licence, easement or consent has been 
granlted; 
(b) inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the oc- 
currence and quality of surface and underground waters, in- 
cluding, in particular- 
(i) installing, maintaining and reading equipment and 
apparatus for the recording of hydrological and hydro- 
geological data; and 
(ii) searching for the purpose of ascertaining the occurrence 
and quality of underground water; 
(c) readin or testing any meter or other measuring device in- 
stalredg for the purpose of ascertaining the amount or rate 
of water abstracted in pursuance of a licence granted under 
these Regulations; 
(4 
taking measures to ascertain the quantity of water abstraated 
or capable of being abtraclted by means of any works; and 
(e) examining records which are required to be kept under the 
Aot or these Regulations. 
m e  indusion Oa this page k admrized by L.N. 96,'1998] 


--- PAGE 51 ---

52 
WATER RESOURCES 
(2) A person authorized under this regulation to enter upon any 
land shall, if so required, produce evidence of his authority before so 
entering. 
(3) Any person who wilfully obstructs a person acting in the 
exercise of his powers under this regulation shall be liable U, the 
penalties specified in section 44 (2) of the Act. 
(4) If a person discloses any information obtained by him in the 
exercise of powers conferred on him by this regulation as to any manu- 
facturing process or trade secret he shall, unless the disclosure is made 
in the course of performing his duty, be liable to the penalties speci- 
fied in section 44 (2) of the Act. 
(5) The Authority shall, on demand being made by the owner or 
any other person having an injterest over any land, live or dead stock. 
crop, trees, buildings or works that are damaged by the Authority in 
the exercise of any functions under the Act or these Regulations, pay 
to the owner or other person fair and reasonable compensation in 
respect of such damage. 
PART VI. General 
proosdureon 
r b v t  
applidm 
for licence. 
24. (1) On receipt of an application for a licence to abstract and 
(U) to be published in the Guzetze and once in each of two SUC- 
cessive weeks in a daily newspaper circulating in Jamaica; 
and 
(b) to be served on any person or body who, in the opinion of 
the Authority, may be affeated by the proposed ab6tmotion 
and use of water. 
(2) The Authority shall also submit an application referred to 
in paragraph (1) to any agency or department of Government exercising 
functions in relation to water and such agency or department may, 
within the specified eriod, make such recommendations as it thinks 
use water the Authority shall cause a notice of the application- 
fit respecting the app P ication. 
(3) A notice under paragraph (1) shall- 
(a) indicate the place at which the application and all dwuments 
submitted with it may be inspeoted by the public, free of 
charge, at all reasonable hours during the specified period; and 
(b) state that any person may, within the specified period, make 
representations to the Authority with respect to the application. 
(4) In this regulation “specified period” means a period of 
thirty days or such further period as the Authority may allow from the 
date on which a notice of the application was, pursuant to paragraph 
(1) (a), first published in such daily newspaper or, from the date of 
submission of the application to such department or agency, as the 
case may be. 
me inclusion of shis page & authorized by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 52 ---

W A  TER RESOURCES 
53 
25. (1) The Aufthonty shall keep, in such manner as it think8 fit, a Red1ter. 
register or registers in which shall be kept a record of- 
(U) every licence granted to abstract and use water; 
(b) any consent granted for welldrilling; and 
(c) every well-driller’s licence, 
and all actions taken under the Aot or these Regulations in respect of 
any such licence or consent shall be entered in the appropriate register. 
(2) Eve? register to which aragraph (1) refers shall be open 
able hours, free of charge, and the Au?hority shall arrange for copies of 
any enltry in an such register as aforesaid to be provided to any person 
on his request dhe pays such fee as may be prescribed. 
for inspection y the public at the o li ces of the Authority at all reason- 
26. An easement constituted under the Act by apementt shall- 
Regjstmtioa 
(U) where the land over or in favour cvf which the easement was s&yzding 
created is under the operation of the Registration of Titles moat. 
Aot, be registered by the Registrar of Titles; and 
(6) where such land as aforesaid is not under the operation of 
the Registration of Title? Act, be recorded by the Deputy 
Keeper of the Records, 
on production of the agreement or, as the case may be, order relating 
to the easement or a copy of such agreement and a diagram prepared 
by the Director of Surveys or any commissioned land surveyor showing 
the position of the easement. 
27. (1) Any person who, pursuant to a licence granted under this Inf-dm 
A d  to abstract and use water, is authorized to sink a well and to ~
t
a
 
abstract underground water or who, in p m w c e  of the provisions of undmwuad 
section 19 (2), intends to sink a well and to abstract underground water 
shall, upon the commencement of such work, keep a journal of the pro- 
gress of the work which shall include measurements of the strata 
passed thmugh and of the levels at which water is struck and sub- 
sequently rests and shall, when so required by the Authority, keep 
specimens of the material excavated from the well. and shall allow 
any perm authorized in writing by the Authority for the purpose at all 
reasonable time- 
(U) to have free access to any such well; 
(b) to inspect the well and the material excavated therefrm; 
(c) to take specimens of such mateaid and of water abstraoted 
(d) to ins 
t and take copies of or extracts from the journal re- 
(2) The pemn si&ing 
any suoh well shall, within thirty days 
after completion or abandonment of the work. send a complete copy of 
the ‘oumal kept under subsection (1) to the Auhd~ty and shall also 
send’ to the ~uthority particulars of any t m  made of the flow of water 
Wore such completion or abandonment, spcdying the rate of flow 
thughout the test and the duration of the test and also, where 
me incl- 
of this m e  is aunplorized by L.N. 96 / 19981 
from the well; and 
q u s o  be kept under this subseaion. 


--- PAGE 53 ---

54 
WATER RESOURCES 
practicable, speoifying the water levels during the test and thereafter until 
the water has returned to its natural level. 
(3) Whexe any such well is sunk in connection with an existing 
pumping station. the particulars of any test to be supplied to the 
Authority shall also include the rate d pumping at the existing works 
during the test. 
(4) Where the person sinkhg a well on any land is not the occupier 
of the land, the obligation to allow a person a u t h o r 4  by the Authorit 
to exercise the rights specified in subqmragraphs (U) to (6) of p a r a g r d  
(1) shall be the obligation of the occupier as well as the person sinking 
the well. 
(5) The Authorit may waive any or all the requirements pre- 
scribed in paragraphs 6) 
to (3) in respect of the sinking of any well 
for purposes of abstracting underground waier- 
(U) if such well does not reach a depth of fifty feet; or 
(b) where the Authority is satisfied that in all the circumstances, 
compliance with any requirements of those paragraphs is 
impracticable or undue expense would be thereby incurred. 
proviaionr 
relathuto 
-1. 
28. (1) Every appeal to the Minister pursuant to section 43 of the 
(U) shall be cummnenced by a notice of appeal which shall be 
addressed to and served upon the Permanent Secretary; and 
(b) shall be served within fourteen days of the date of notification 
of the decision in respeot of which the appal is made. 
1 may be in the form of a letter and shall 
subjexA matter of the appeal arose, and there shall be attached tro such 
n&ce copies of any correspondence or other documents or statements 
verified by statutory declaration of facts relating to the subject matter 
of the appeal. 
(3) The appellant shall send a copy of the notice of appeal CO 
the Authority and shall dso serve a copy thereof. together w& copies 
of any documents attached thereto, upon the respondent within the 
same time as a notice of appeal is required under paragraph (1) ,to 
be served, and an affidavit verifying such service shall be delivered to 
the Permanent Secretary. 
(4) Within seven days of the receipt of such aflidavit. the 
Permanent Secretary may request the Authority to furnish a statement 
in writing setting out the reasons for the decismns complained of, and 
the Authority shall comply therewith as won as practicable after the 
request is made. 
(5) The Minister may order that any books, papers or other 
documents, relating to the subjeot matter of the appeal which are in 
the possession of either party shall be produced by the party in pos- 
session thereof. 
Act against a decision of the Authority- 
(2) The notice of ap 
set forth clearly the grou n$8 
s of the appeal, and the date upon which the 
F
e
 
holsusion of bhis page tP authorized by L.N. %/ 19981 


--- PAGE 54 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
55 
PART 
VII. Transitional Provisions 
29. In this Part “prescribed enactment” means- 
ItlitOXpl-dB- 
tion d 
Part VII. 
(U) section 19 (1) of the Irrigation Act; 
(b) seotion 3, 6 or 7 of the Kingston and St. Andrew Water 
(c) section 19 (I) (e), 35 (e) or 50 of the Mining Act; 
(d) section 23 of the Petroleum Act. 
Supply Act; 
30. (1) A licence of right referred to in section 54 (1) of the Act Licsaaa 
shall be in the same form as that set out for a licence granted pursuant ofrieht. 
to regulation 5 and shall also be subject to the implied term specified 
in section 23 of the Act. 
(2) In determining the quantity of water that it should authorize 
to be abstracted and used under a licence of right, the Authority- 
(U) shall m i d e r  whether or not the applicant is entitled to 
abstract and use water in the exercise of any right existing 
immediately before the appointed day undex or pursuant to a 
prescribed enadmak and 
(b) shall have regard It0 the requirements of the applicant as 
(i) 
works, machinery or apparatus which were constructed 
or installed before the appointed day or which were in 
the muse of being constructed or installed before that 
day; or 
(ii) such other evidence as the Authority thinks reasonable 
and appropriate. 
(3) In making provision as to the purpose for which watm may 
(U) shall take into accoullt the purpose for which the water was 
abstracted and used in exercise of the right existing 
immediately before the appointed day under or pursuant to a 
prescribed enactment; and 
(6) shall have regard to the requirements of the a licant as 
deteamined by such evidence as lthe Authority &s 
m n -  
able and appropriate. 
31. (1) A licence to abstract and use water granted pursuant to Lhnes 
section 54 (2) of the Act shall be in the same form as that set out for W o n  
a licence granted pursuant to regulation 5 and shall also be subject to longuw* 
the implied term specified in section 23 of the Act. 
to be abstracted and used under such licence the Adority- 
indicated by- 
be abstraoted under the licence of right, the Authority- 
(2) In determining the quantity of water that it should authorize 
(U) shall take into account the quantities of water used d d q  
the period referred to in section 54 (2) of the Ad; 
(b) shall have regard 60 the requirements of the applicant as 
mentioned in sub-paragraph (6) of paragraph (2) of regulation 
30. 
me inclusion of bhh page is authorized by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 55 ---

56 
WATER RESOURCES 
(3) In making provision as to the purpose for which water may 
be abstraded under a licence to which this section refers. the Au- 
thority- 
(U) shall have regard to the purpose for which the water waa 
abstracted and used during the period referred to in section 
54 (2) of the Act; and 
(b) shall take into account the requirements of the applicant as 
determined by such evidence as the Authority thinks reason- 
able and appropriate. 
~ppliathm 
of e.M 
WOdns. 
32. The provisions of these Regulations relating to the revocation, 
suspension and variation of a licence granted under Part I1 to abstract 
and use water and to all the procedures to be followed by an applicant 
and the Authority with respect to an application therefor shall apply 
mutatis murandis to a licence granted pursuant to this Part. 
Reasons* 
var~in~m 
of Water 
be in 
he granted. 
writing. 
33. The Authority shall state in writing the reasons for any decision 
made pursuant to this Part which has the effect of varying the use 
of water in respect of which a licence to which this Part refers may 
SCHEDULE 
(Regulations 3 (l), 5 (4). 
18 (11, (2). 190). (3). 
30(1) ) 
(Regulation 3 (1) ) 
FORM A 
(To be completed in duplicate) 
Application No .................. 
"HE WATER RESOURCE3 ACT 
1. Name of Applicant ............................................................... 
2. Address of Applicant.. .......................................................... 
3. Location of proposed work or of existing work in respeot of which 
exltension is proposed ....................................... 
4. Name of Contractor ............................................................ 
5. Address of Contractor ......................................................... 
6. Source of water for which licence is desired .............................. 
hPLICATION FOR A LICENCE 
'ID ABSTRACT 
AND USE WATER 
alteration or 
........................................................................................ 
7. Purpose for which water is to be used ....................................... 
........................................................................................ 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. %/1998] 


--- PAGE 56 ---

WA TER RESOURCES 
5 7  
8. If water is required for irrigation, state- 
(a) area and crop type to be irrigated.. .......... .:. .................. 
............................................................................ 
(6) system of irrigation ................................................... 
............................................................................ 
9. Means of disposal of excess or waste water .............................. 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
10. Technical details: 
(i) %bated depth of borehole or well .................. metres 
(ii) Diameter or borehole or well ..................... 
centimetres . 
(iii) In the case of antesian supplies, the method pmposed for 
controlling the flow from the borehole and for preventing 
leakage around the borehole lining .............................. 
............................................................................ 
(iv) Geological strata from which water is to be drawn, e.g. 
li,mestone, gravel, etc.. .............................................. 
(v) State the method of abstracting water.. ...................... 
........................................................................... 
(vi) Maximum daily quantity of water to be abstracted in 
cubic metres.. .......................................................... 
(vii) Type of apparatus proposed for measuring and recording 
the rate of abstraction.. .............................................. 
(viii) Other relevant technical information.. ......................... 
........................................................................... 
11. State whether any request for a supply of water has been made to 
the National Water C4nnmiwitm or National Irrigation Commis. 
sion Ltd. and, if so, with what result ....................................... 
........................................................................................ 
12. Any further information which the Authority may take into 
account in considering the application.. .................................. 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
m e  inclusion ofthis mge h authorized ,by L.N. 961 19981 


--- PAGE 57 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
Note : 
Completed forms must be accompanied by: 
(1) ltwo copies of a map on a scale of 1 : 50,000 showing 
location of works; 
(2) such other documents as the Authority may require; and 
(3) the relevant fee. 
I hereby appl for a licence under the Water Resourcee Act and 
declare that to d e  best of my knowledge and belief the particulars set 
out in this application are true and correct. 
.......................................... 
.............................. 
Signature of Appli- 
mite 
To be Completed 'by the Secretary of the Authority 
Indicate whether licence granted or refused .................................... 
Date of grant or r e W  of licence ............................................. 
:.. 
If application refused, reason for refusal ....................................... 
[E"'- 
.............................................................................................. 
.............................................................................................. 
............................................. 
Sacratary, 
Wates Resourcee Authority. 
............................................. 
Date 
FORM 
B 
(Regulation S(4) ) 
Licence No .................. 
THE WATER RESOURCES ACT 
LICENCE 
To ABSTIUcr AND USE WATER 
........................................................................................... 
ot 
Name of Licensee 
.............................................................................................. 
Address of Licensee 
is hereby granted a licence to abstmat and use water, mbjeut to the 
provisions of the Water Resources Act and Regulations made &me- 
under and to the terms and conditions herein spe4fied. 
____ 
_____I_ 
p
e
 
klimion 
&is pp'ge is a&hmized iby L.N. 96 / 19981 


--- PAGE 58 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
59 
Terms and Conditions of Licence 
1. Water may be abstracted pursuant to this licence only from ...... 
(source) 
.............................. 
located at ............................................. 
such abstraction to be at a rate not exceeding ..................... 
cubic 
metres per day. 
2. Water abstracted pursuant to this licence may be used for the 
following purposes only: 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
......................................................................................... 
3. Water may be abstracted pursuant to this licence in the following 
manner only: ...................................................................... 
....................................................................................... 
....................................................................................... 
4. Within thirty (30) days d the installation of the pump by which 
water is to be abstracted the licensee shall install on the supply line 
leading from such pump, a full flow metex (of a type approved by 
the Authority) for the pwpose of measuring the water abstracted. 
5. The licensee shall make a monthly return to the Authority of the 
amount of water abstracted. 
6. The licence becomes null and void if within twelve months from 
the date of the issue thereof, no water is abstracted or used ftiom 
the approved source pursuant to such licence. 
7. The licence shall be valid for a period of.. ..................... 
.from 
the date of the issue thereof, subject to the provisions of the Act 
and Reguh4ions made thereunder relating to its revocation. ampen- 
sion and variation. 
F e ~ ~ ~ d b ~ i s ~ L ~ ~ i z e d 1 ~ L . N .  
%/1998] 


--- PAGE 59 ---

60 
Dated this 
WATER RESOURCES 
Additional Terms and Conditions (if any) 
day of 
Seal 
............................................. 
Secretary, 
Water Resources Alrthority. 
me inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. %/1998] 


--- PAGE 60 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
61 
FORM C 
(To be completed in duplicate) 
(Regulation lS(1) 
Application No.. ................ 
THE WATER RESOURCFS ACT 
APPLICATION 
FOR CONSENT 
OF AUTHORITY 
TO WELL-DRILLING 
1. Name of Applicant ............................................................... 
2. Address of Applicant.. ................................................ 
.!. ....... 
........................................................................................ 
3. Location of proposed work or of existing work ........................ 
........................................................................................ 
4. Indicate the nature of your interest in the land on which well- 
drilling is to take place (i.e. whether you are owner, lessee, tenant, 
5. Name of Drilling Contractor ................................................ 
*) 
6. Address of Drilling Contraotor.. .............................................. 
7. Purpose of drilling ..... .........................................-................ 
........................................................................................ 
8. Technical details: 
(i) Estimated depth of borehole or well .................. 
metrea 
(ii) Diameter of borehole or well ..................... 
centimetres 
(iii) Method of drilling ................................................... 
(iv) Method of construction ............................................. 
(v) In the case of artesian supplies, the method proposed hr 
controlling the flow from the borehole and for preventing 
leakage around the borehole lining.. ............................ 
............................................................................ 
(vi) Other technical information.. ..................................... 
............................................................................ 
............................................................................ 
9. Any further matters which the Authority should take into accouILt 
in considering the application .................................................. 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
~ 
- 
-- 
-~ 
. ~- 
~ 
~~ .~ 
[The inclusion of this page is authorized by L.N. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 61 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
Note : 
Completed forms must be accompanied by- 
(1) two copies of a map on a scale of 1 : 50.000 showing 
location of proposed well along with such other maps, 
doouments and information as the Au4hority may 
require; and 
(2) the relevant fee. 
I hereby apply €or the consent of the Authority under the Water 
Resources Act for the drilling of a well and hereby declare that to the 
best of my knowlcdg the above particulars are true and correot. 
................................................ 
.................................... 
Signature d Applicant 
IMe 
To be completed by the Secrefury of the Authority 
Indicate whether application granted or refused.. ............................ 
Date of grant or refusal ............................................................... 
If applicgtion refused, reason for refusal ....................................... 
............................................................................................... 
.............................................................................................. 
............................................. 
-v. 
Water Resaurccs Authority. 
............................................. 
D& 


--- PAGE 62 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
63 
FORM 
D 
(Regulation 18 (2) ) 
Consent No.. ................ 
THE WATER RESOURCES ACI' 
CONSENT OF THE WATER RESOURCES 
AUTHORITY 
To WELL-DRILLMG 
...........................................................................................of 
Name 
.............................................................................................. 
Address 
is hereby given consent to: 
sink ( ) 
enlarge ( 1 
otherwistalter ( 
) 
Tick as appropriate. 
i 
a well on land located at ............................................................ 
.............................................................................................. 
subjeat to the provisions of the Water Resources Act and Regulations 
made tbercunder and to such terms and conditions as are specified 
herein. 
Terms and Conditions 
1. This consent shall be valid for a period of .............................. 
from the date hered, subjeot to the provisions of the Act and the 
regulations relating to its revocation, suspension and variation. 
2. The following works only are hereby authorized to be done:- 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
Additional Terms and Conditions (if any). 
Dated this 
day of 
, 19 . 
............................................. 
Secretary. 
Water Resources Authority. 
[Tbeincludm obbhispergeisa'~~rizsd,~L~..N.%/1998] 


--- PAGE 63 ---

64 
WATER RESOURCES 
FORM E 
(Regulation 19(1) 1 
(To be completed in duplicate) 
Application No.. ................ 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
THE WATER RESOURCES ACT 
APPLICATION 
FOR WIXL-DRILLER’S 
LICENCE 
Name of Applicant ............................................................... 
Address of Applicant ............................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
Date of Birth ..................................................................... 
Educational background.. ....................................................... 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
Indicate specific training relevant to well-d.ril1ing ..................... 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
Indicate specific experience in well-drilling.. ............................ 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
........................................................................................ 
Are you self-employed?. ........................................................ 
Name of Employer.. ....................................................... 
Address of Employet.. .................................................... 
If not self-employed : 
How long employed by present EnIpbyer? ........................ 
State names and addresses of two references ........................... 
.................................................................................... 
.................................................................................... 
.................................................................................... 
.................................................................................... 
___ 
[The inclusion of thm page is authorized by L.N. %[ 19981 


--- PAGE 64 ---

WATER RESOURCES 
65 
Note : 
Completed forms must be accompanied by- 
(U) such documents or information as the Authority may 
require; and 
(b) the relevant fee. 
I hereby apply for a welldriller’s licence pursuant b the Water 
Resources Act and declare that to the best of my knowledge the above 
particulars we true and correct. 
I furthex declare that I am able to read and to make written repoFts 
on any well-drilling activity which I might undertake. 
................................................ 
..................................... 
Signature of Applicant 
Date 
(To be completed by the Secretary of the Aufhoriry) 
Indicate whether application granted or refused .............................. 
Date of grant or refusal ............................................................... 
U application refused, reason for refusal.. ..................................... 
.............................................................................................. 
.............................................................................................. 
............................................................................................... 
............................................. 
Secretary. 
Water Retmucea Authority. 
............................................. 
Dslte 
[The inclusion d this page is authorized by L.I*. 96/ 19981 


--- PAGE 65 ---

66 
WATER RESOURCES 
FORM F 
(Regulation 19(3) ) 
Licence NO ................... 
THE WATER RESOURCES AC" 
WELL-DRILLER'S 
LICENCE 
............................................ *.of.. ............................................ 
(Name of Licensee) 
(Address of Licensee) 
.............................................................................................. 
is hereby granted a licence to praotise as a well-driller, subject to the 
provisions of the Water Rmurces Act and Rephtions made there- 
under and to such terms and conditions as may be specified herein. 
The licence shall be valid for a period of .............................. 
from the date hereof, subject to the provisions d the Act and Regula- 
tions relating to its revocation and suspension. 
Terms nnd Conditions of Licence (if any) 
Dated this 
day of 
!kxi 
. 19 . 
............................................. 
Secretary, 
Water Resources Authority. 
m e  
inclusion of &is page is authorized by L.N. 96 / 19981 
