Official Gazette
3385

We, Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
In accordance with Article (31) of the Constitution,
And based on the decision of the Senate and the House of Representatives,
Do hereby approve the following Law and order its promulgation and addition to the laws of the State:

Law No. (22) of 2014
A Law Amending the Water Authority Law

Article 1 - This Law shall be cited as (A Law Amending the Water Authority Law of 2014) and shall be read in conjunction with Law No. (18) of 1988, hereinafter referred to as the original Law, and any amendments thereto, as a single law, and it shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.

Article 2 - The text of Article (16) of the original Law is hereby repealed and replaced with the following text:

Article 16
The funds of the Authority and the funds of companies owned by it, including funds whose collection is entrusted to another entity, shall be considered public funds and shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of the Public Funds Collection Law or any other law that may replace it. For this purpose, the Secretary-General shall exercise the powers of the Administrative Governor and the Public Funds Collection Committee as stipulated in the aforementioned Law.

3386
Official Gazette

Article 3 - Article (21) of the original Law is amended by adding paragraph (a) thereto with the following text and renumbering paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) thereof to become paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) respectively:

a- The transfer of ownership of any land containing groundwater wells is not permitted until all amounts due to the Authority have been paid. If the transfer of ownership is to a non-Jordanian individual, the approval of the Council of Ministers is required.

Article 4 - The text of Article (30) of the original Law is hereby repealed and replaced with the following text:

Article 30
a- Without prejudice to any more severe penalty stipulated in any other law, a penalty of imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not exceeding five years and a fine of not less than two thousand dinars and not exceeding seven thousand dinars shall be imposed on any person who commits any of the following acts:
1- Assaulting main and transmission water pipelines.
2- Assaulting wastewater treatment plants and pumping, purification, and desalination stations.
3- Causing pollution in wells and springs used for drinking purposes, water collection reservoirs, pumping and desalination stations, and main and transmission water pipelines owned by the Authority.
4- Drilling groundwater wells without a license.

3387
Official Gazette

b- Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this Article, a penalty of imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not exceeding three years and a fine of not less than five thousand dinars shall be imposed on any person who assaults any of the Authority's projects, water sources, or wastewater projects that are under the administration or supervision of the Authority and causes damage to any of the installations, machinery, equipment, or materials belonging to the Authority or to those projects, sources, or wastewater projects, or causes the disruption of any of them.
c- A penalty of imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not exceeding three years and a fine of not less than one thousand dinars and not exceeding five thousand dinars shall be imposed on any person who commits any of the following acts:
1- Erecting any installations or buildings of any kind on state lands within the land belt stipulated in Article (24) of this Law.
2- Violating the conditions stipulated in the licenses granted for the purpose of drilling, deepening, or cleaning groundwater wells, or any license granted in accordance with the provisions of relevant effective legislation.
3- Leaving drilling rigs in locations other than those designated for them without the prior approval of the Authority.
d- A penalty of imprisonment for a term of not less than four months and not exceeding two years and a fine of not less than one thousand dinars and not exceeding three thousand dinars shall be imposed on any person who commits any of the following acts:
1- Undertaking any of the works of the Authority as specified by the provisions of this Law and the regulations issued thereunder without its prior written approval, including disposing of water sources, water, or projects belonging to the Authority, or public wastewater projects, in a manner that violates the provisions of this Law, including selling, gifting, transferring, using, or exploiting the water.

3388
Official Gazette

2- Committing any act or engaging in any conduct that causes harm to those sources, water, or their special projects, or using wastewater projects in a manner that violates the provisions of this Law and the regulations issued thereunder.
3- Undertaking any work related to water or wastewater without obtaining the licenses, permits, or approvals in accordance with the provisions of this Law, or committing any of these acts in violation of the provisions of this Law and the regulations issued thereunder.
e- The provisions of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this Article shall apply to any accomplice, accessory, or instigator involved in the commission of the crime.
f- The provisions stipulated in this Article shall apply to the projects of the Authority managed by any entity in accordance with Article (28) of this Law, and to the projects and installations that are under the management or supervision of any of the companies owned by the Authority.
g- 1- For the purposes of implementing the provisions of this Law, the employees of the Authority and the employees of the companies owned by it, who are designated by the Minister or the Secretary-General, shall have the capacity of judicial police.
2- The Secretary-General shall have the authority to issue a decision to remove violations and encroachments that occur on the lands, water, and installations located within the Authority's area of jurisdiction through administrative means at the violator's expense, and he may, when necessary, seek the assistance of public security personnel or any other entity for this purpose.

3389
Official Gazette

3- Employees of the Ministry and employees of the Authority, who are designated by the Minister or the Secretary-General, shall have the right to approach the competent courts to obtain a certified copy of the penal judgments issued in cases to which the Authority is a party, and to follow up on their execution through the enforcement departments and the Public Prosecutor.
h- The quantities of water exploited or extracted in a manner that violates the provisions of this Law and the regulations issued thereunder shall be estimated, and their cost shall be estimated based on criteria adopted by the Board for this purpose, including the irrigated area, crop type, electricity consumed, aerial imagery, or satellite imagery.
i- The competent court shall, in addition to the penalties stipulated in this Article, order the following:
1- Confiscation of the tools, machinery, drilling rigs, and materials seized in accordance with the provisions of this Law, in addition to obligating the violator to remove the effects of the crime and restore the situation to its state prior to its commission. The ownership of the machinery, tools, and materials confiscated in accordance with the provisions of this Law shall be transferred to the Authority.
2- Collection of the price of the water exploited or extracted in a manner that violates the provisions of this Law and the regulations issued thereunder, and any administrative expenses resulting therefrom.
j- The penalty shall be doubled in the case of repetition of any of the acts stipulated in this Article.

Article 5 - The original Law is amended by adding Article (31) thereto with the following text and renumbering Articles (31), (32), and (33) thereof to become Articles (32), (33), and (34) respectively:

Article 31
Water transmission projects, including transmission pipelines and their appurtenances, are considered strategic projects of special importance. The procedures related to the protection of these projects shall be determined by instructions issued by the Council of Ministers based on the recommendation of the Minister.

3390
Official Gazette

And the procedures related to the protection of these projects shall be determined by instructions issued by the Council of Ministers based on the recommendation of the Minister.

11/5/2014
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein

Position	Name
Prime Minister and Minister of Defence	Dr. Abdullah Ensour
Minister of Interior	Hussein Hazza' Al Majali
Minister of Environment	Dr. Taher Shakhshir
Minister of Labour and Minister of Tourism and Antiquities	Dr. Nidal Mardi Al-Qatamin
Minister of Planning and International Cooperation	Dr. Ibrahim Saif
Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources	Dr. Mohammad Hamed
Minister of Health	Dr. Ali Al-Hyasat
Minister of Political and Parliamentary Affairs	Dr. Khaled Al-Kalaldeh
Minister of Culture	Dr. Lana Mohammed Mamkegh
Minister of Transport	Dr. Lina Shabeeb
Minister of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs and Holy Places	Dr. Hayel Abdul Hafiz Daoud
Minister of Justice	Dr. Bassam Sameer Talhouni
Minister of Social Development	Reem Mamdouh Abu Hassan
Minister of Municipal Affairs	Engineer Walid Al-Masri
Minister of Public Sector Development	Dr. Khleif Al-Khawaldeh
Minister of Agriculture	Dr. Akef Al-Zoubi
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates	Nasser Judeh
Minister of Education	Dr. Mohammad Thneibat
Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research	Dr. Amin Mahmoud
Minister of Industry, Trade, and Supply	Dr. Hatem Hafez Al-Halawani
Minister of Finance	Dr. Umayya Toukan
Minister of State for Prime Ministry Affairs	Dr. Ahmad Ziyadat
Minister of State for Media Affairs	Dr. Mohammad Hussein Al-Momani
Minister of Public Works and Housing	Engineer Sami Halaseh
Minister of State	Dr. Salameh Naimat
Minister of Information and Communications Technology	Dr. Azzam Talal Tawfiq Sleit