

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
The Water Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
The Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 9 July, 2003 No 481. 
       
      Footnote. The table of contents is excluded by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated June 30, 2021 № 59-VII (shall be enforced from 01.01.2022). 
       Footnote. Throughout the text:  
       the words "the authorized body for use and protection of mineral resources" are 
replaced by the words "the authorized body for study and use of mineral resources"; 
the words "the authorized body for use and protection of mineral resources" are 
replaced by the words "the authorized body for study and use of mineral resources";  
       the words "the central executive body of the Republic of Kazakhstan for 
environmental protection" are replaced by the words "the authorized state body for 
environmental protection" by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 9 January, 
2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2);  
       the words "the authorized body for use and protection of water resources" are 
replaced by the words "the authorized body" by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2);  
       the words “the authorized body for use and protection of water resources” are 
replaced by the words “the authorized body” by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Article 2);  
      the words "animal and vegetable origin" are replaced by the words "vegetable and 
animal origin" by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 25.01.2012 No 548-
IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication ); 
      the words "for the study and use of mineral resources" shall be  replaced by the 
words "for the study of mineral resources" in accordance with the Law of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan dated 27.12.2017 № 126-VI (shall be enforced upon expiration of  six 
months after the day of its first official publication); 
      the words "an authorized body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare 
of the population", "an authorized body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological 
welfare of the population", "an authorized body in the field of sanitary and 
epidemiological welfare of the population", "an authorized body in the field of 
sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population" and " of the authorized body 
in the field of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population "are replaced, 
respectively, by the words" a state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological 
well-being of the population "," a state body in the field of sanitary and 
epidemiological well-being of the population "," a state body in the field of sanitary 


--- PAGE 2 ---

and epidemiological well-being of the population "," state body in the field of sanitary 
and epidemiological well-being of the population "and" a state body in the field of 
sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population "in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 10.28.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced 
upon the expiration of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication) 
 General part 
Section 1. General provisions  
Chapter 1. Basic provisions  
Article 1. Basic definitions, used in this Code  
       In this Code, the following definitions shall be used:  
       1) watercourse - the water body, characterized by the water flowing towards a 
slope in a slight depression in the earth's surface;  
       2) a water area - the water area, bounded by the natural, artificial or conventional 
boundaries;  
      2-1) drinking water - water in its natural condition or after processing, responsible 
for quality of established national standards and hygienic normative standards, 
intended for drinking and household needs of population; 
       3) non-alternative sources of drinking water supply - the only sources of drinking 
water supply for water users, the replacement of which is impossible or unfeasible;  
      3-1) drinking and (or) household drinking water supply (hereinafter - drinking 
water supply) - a technological process providing for diversion, preparation, storage, 
transportation and delivery of drinking water to water consumers; 
      3-2) boundary parting of balance attribution - place parting of elements of water 
supply and water discharge systems between owners on the grounds of ownership, 
economic management or operational management, which indicated on the schemes; 
      3-3) fish farming facilities are non-permanent structures (mobile complexes, 
containerised buildings, taken under one roof or freestanding) designed to house 
technical personnel and equipment for incubation of eggs and rearing of fish planting 
material for stocking, protection of the fish farm, storage of fish feed, fishing and non-
fishing tools, and cages; 
       4) basin management principle - the management of water resources upon the 
hydrographic features, conducted under the distribution of water resources within river 
basins, lakes and other water bodies between the administrative-territorial units;  
      4-1) dam - supporting hydraulic structure on watercourse for raising water level 
and (or) creating a reservoir; 
      4-2) certification of organizations for the right to carry out work in the field of dam 
safety - official recognition by the department of the authorized body of the powers of 
a legal entity to perform work in the field of dam safety; 


--- PAGE 3 ---

      4-3) dam safety – a condition of dam protection from catastrophic destruction; 
       5) hydro land reclaiming system - the complex of technologically interconnected 
hydraulic structures, devices and equipment, designed for irrigation, watering and 
reclamation of lands;  
       6) participants of irrigation and drainage condominium - - the individuals and (or) 
legal entities, having a land plot in a private ownership or in the paid temporary use, 
irrigated by one irrigation and drainage system or its components, which is a part of 
irrigation and drainage condominium on the common ownership right;  
      6-1) hydro-reclamation measures - water regime regulation of soils with the help 
of hydro-reclamation systems, as well as separately located hydraulic structures; 
       7) hydraulic engineering structures (waterworks) - the engineering structures, used 
for water resources management, water supply to water users, water supply and 
sanitation, prevention of harmful effects of waters;  
      7-1) system of drinking water supply of settlements - a complex of interconnected 
water objects and hydraulic structures, unifying water intakes, water purification 
plants, clean-water reservoirs, water pumping stations and networks for providing 
drinking water to water consumers; 
       8) a coastal line - a strip of land, running along the banks of water bodies, the 
width of twenty meters from the coastal line, used to install navigation signs and 
equipment in compliance with the environmental requirements;  
       9) a coastline - the shoreline of a water body, formed as a result of the maximum 
high tide (top of the tide);  
      9-1) Groundwater - concentrations of water in the subsurface; 
       10) underground water basin - a set of water bearing stratum, located under the 
earth’s surface;  
       11) fields and areas of underground waters – - the parts of water bearing strata 
with favorable conditions for production and extraction of underground waters;  
       12) drinking and household underground waters - the underground waters, which, 
in terms of quality in the natural condition or after processing, meet the regulatory 
requirements and are intended for drinking and household needs of a person or for 
production of drinking products;  
       13) surface water bodies - the permanent or temporary concentration of waters on 
the land surface in the form of the land relief with boundaries, volume and water 
regime;  
      13-3) multi-factor inspection - assessment of the technical condition of hydraulic 
structures and main equipment, determination of the residual life of their elements by 
visual inspection and a complex of engineering studies (geodetic, geophysical, 


--- PAGE 4 ---

geotechnical, hydrographic and others) in order to prevent the harmful effects of 
water; 
      13-2) authorized body in the field of public utilities - the central executive body, 
managing and conducting an inter-sectoral coordination in water supply area and 
wastewater disposal within settlements; 
       14) the return water - the underground and surface waters, running-off from 
irrigated areas, or the waters, discharged by industrial enterprises, domestic water 
supply installations and utilities;  
      15) Tubular filter well - a section of pipe with a number of holes, clogged into the 
first aquifer from the surface; 
      16) reclaimed lands - the lands, where reclamation works were carried out 
(agroforestal, agro-technical, hydro reclaiming and chemical); 
       17) mineral underground waters - the underground waters, which have positive 
balneologic effect due to its composition and (or) content of some specific 
components;  
       18) the channels, equivalent to the rivers - the man-made structures, designed to 
transfer water from one basin to another, and from one river system to another;  
      18-1) industrial ground waters - ground waters used for extraction of minerals 
contained in them (rare elements, halogens and others); 
      19) production and technical underground waters - the underground waters, which, 
due to their quality and physical properties are used or may be used for industrial 
water supply; 
      19-1) boundary parting of operational responsibility - place parting of elements of 
water supply and water discharge systems on the grounds of obligations (responsibility 
for its operation) established by agreement of the parties. In the absence of such 
agreement, the boundary of operational liability shall be established on boundary 
parting of balance attribution; 
      20) sanitary protection zone - the specially allotted area around the water supply 
source and water supply facilities, which must comply with the established regime for 
protection of the water source (open and underground), water supply facilities and the 
surrounding area from contamination to prevent degradation of water quality; 
       21) waste water - the water, produced as a result of human activity or in the 
contaminated area, discharged into the natural or artificial water bodies or onto the 
land;  
      21-1) complexes of waste water treatment unit - units for mechanical and 
biological wastewater treatment of settlements with or without the use of chemical 


--- PAGE 5 ---

reagents, including artificial water bodies intended for natural biological waste water 
treatment; 
      21-2) artificial water bodies intended for natural biological waste water treatment - 
containment pond, evaporation ponds, biological ponds, filtration fields, irrigation 
fields; 
       22) an irrigation canal - an artificial construction, designed for transportation of 
water from irrigation sources to the areas, requiring irrigation;  
       23) wastewater disposal - a set of measures, ensuring collection, transportation, 
treatment and disposal of wastewater through the drainage system to the water bodies 
and (or) onto the terrain relief;  
      23-1) local waste water treatment units - a set of units and devices of water 
consumer for cleaning own waste water; 
       24) drainage system - a set of utilities and facilities, designed for collection, 
transportation, treatment and disposal of wastewaters;  
      25) delivery point - a place of water intake from a water source by a water user, as 
well as a gauging station in the place of water supply from the water user to the water 
consumer; 
      25-1) water metering device - a technical equipment for measuring volume of 
water (drinking, industrial, waste water and other types of water), having normalized 
metrological characteristics, reproducing and storing a unit of physical quantity for a 
certain period of time allowed for use for commercial accounting of water in the 
manner established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan; 
      25-2) commercial accounting of water - accounting of amount of water necessary 
for mutual settlement between the parties under the contract for water supply and (or) 
water disposal; 
       26) a catchment area – the area, within the boundaries of which the water 
resources of a water body are formed;  
       27) the releases - the periodic or episodic releases of water from a water reservoir 
to control the flow or level of water on the underlying sector of the watercourse or the 
water level in the reservoir itself;  
      28) water protection zone - the area adjacent to water bodies where a special 
regime of economic activity shall be established to prevent pollution,  clogging of 
water and depletion of water; 
      29) water protection strip - the territory the width of not less than thirty-five meters 
within the water protection zone, adjacent to the water body, that has a regime of the 
limited economic activity; 


--- PAGE 6 ---

       30) the authorized body for use and protection of water resources, water supply, 
sanitation (hereinafter - the authorized body) is the state body, managing and 
controlling the use and protection of water resources, water supply, and wastewater 
disposal outside the rural settlements;  
       31) the lands of the water fund - the lands:  
       occupied by water bodies (rivers, and equivalent channels, lakes, reservoirs, ponds 
and other inland waters, territorial waters, glaciers, wetlands), and water management 
facilities to control runoff, located at the water sources;  
       allocated for water protection zones of water bodies;  
       allocated for the sanitary protection zones for drinking water supply;  
      31-1) water service pipe - a pipeline from the distribution network of water supply, 
including a well with stop valves at the connection point, to the first valve in building; 
       32) the waters - a set of all the waters that are concentrated in water bodies;  
       33) adverse impact of waters - a flood, inundation, flooding and other negative 
effects of water, causing emergency situations of natural and man-made origin;  
       34) wetlands - the areas of swamps, fens, peat lands or ponds: the natural or 
artificial, perennial, stagnant or intermittent, static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, 
including marine water areas the depth of which does not exceed six meters at the low 
tide;  
       35) water supply - a set of measures, providing intake, storage, preparation, 
supply and distribution of water through the water supply systems to the water 
consumers;  
      36) particularly important group and local water supply systems - the group and 
local drinking water supply systems having priority and special social importance and 
referred to category of the particularly important water supply systems by authorized 
body; 
      36-1) water supply and (or) water discharge organization - water supply 
organization carrying out  operation of  water supply and water discharge systems in 
settlements; 
       37) water supply system - a set of engineering utilities and facilities, intended for 
intake, storage, treatment, supply and distribution of water to the places of 
consumption;  
      38) protection of water bodies - the activity, aimed at preservation, restoration and 
rehabilitation of water bodies, as well as prevention of harmful effects of waters; ] 
       39) the use of water bodies - the extraction of useful natural properties from water 
bodies to meet the material or any other needs of individual or legal entities;  


--- PAGE 7 ---

       40) water body basin - the territory, including the catchment areas of the 
hydraulically connected water bodies and watercourses;  
       41) water use - the use of water resources in the order, stipulated by legislation of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan, to meet own needs and (or) the commercial interests of 
individual and legal entities;  
       42) a water consumer - an individual or legal entity, who, in accordance with the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, has the right to use water resources to meet 
his own needs and (or) commercial interests;  
       43) water regime - the temporal changes of the levels, flow rates and volumes of 
water in water bodies and soils;  
      43-1) water quality standards - quantitative indicators of limit hydrochemical, 
microbiological, physical characteristics of water, which must be observed in order to 
achieve the target indicators of the condition of surface water objects; 
       44) water easement - the right for a limited use of a water body;  
       45) water intake facility - a set of structures and devices, used for water intakes 
from water bodies;  
       46) hydro-engineering complex - a group of technologically related hydraulic 
structures, used for various purposes and located in the same section line;  
      46-1) specific power requirement of water consumption or water discharge - the 
established amount of potable waters or wastewater discharges per unit of produced 
product (for a certain amount of work performed) for water use of individuals and 
legal entities; 
      46-2) enlarged norm of water consumption or water discharge - specific power 
requirement of water consumption or water discharge for economic sector; 
       47) a water user - an individual or legal entity, consuming water from water 
bodies or receiving services from water supply organizations through the water supply 
systems;  
       48) water saving - a system of measures, ensuring rational and efficient use of 
water resources;  
       49) water management - a branch of the economy, associated with the use, 
protection and rehabilitation of water bodies;  
       50) water management system- a complex of interconnected water bodies and 
hydraulic structures;  
       51) the safety of water systems and structures - the property of the elements of 
water management systems, structures, allowing to protect the life, health and 
legitimate interests of the population, environment and economic facilities;  


--- PAGE 8 ---

       52) ensuring the safety of water systems and structures - the development of 
measures and prevention of accidents at the water management systems and structures;  
       53) the safety criteria for water systems and facilities - the limits of technical 
indicators, assessing the status of the water systems and structures, their operating 
conditions, corresponding to the acceptable risk level of accidents at the water 
management systems and structures;  
       54) water facilities - the man-made hydraulic structures and devices, created to 
regulate the use and protection of water resources, water supply, wastewater disposal 
and elimination of the harmful effects of waters;  
       55) water management organizations - the legal entities, involved in regulation, 
supply, rehabilitation of waters, water supply, wastewater disposal and maintenance of 
water bodies;  
       56) water bearing zones, water-bearing strata and rock units - the waters, 
concentrated in the cracks and pores of rocks, that are connected hydraulically;  
      56-1) thermal waters - underground waters with temperature over 20o C; 
       57) trans-boundary impact - the adverse effects, coming from quantitative or 
qualitative changes in trans-boundary waters, caused by human activity, the physical 
origin of which is wholly or partly situated in the territory of the adjoined state or the 
neighboring countries;  
      57-1) Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 03.01.2022 № 
101-VII (shall be enforced upon expiration of sixty calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication); 
 
      58) a section line - the section of the river, where hydroelectric facilities are 
located; 
      59) mine well - vertical mining, the depth of which is greater than the cross-
section, created for the withdrawal of groundwater in the first from the surface of the 
aquifer for water supply, drainage of rocks and removal of atmospheric and surface 
water from the ground; 
       60) a capitation structure - an engineering facility, which, at the natural 
underground water outlet, provides opening and delivery of the waters on the earth’s 
surface for their further use.  
      Footnote. Article 1 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); as amended by the Laws 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 22.07.2011 No 
479-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 13.06.2013 № 102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be 


--- PAGE 9 ---

enforced from 01.01.2015); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 29.10.2015 № 376-V 
(shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of sixty calendar days after its first official publication); № 126-VI dated 
27.12.2017 ( shall be enforced upon expiration of six months after its first official 
publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 30.12.2020 № 397-
VI (shall enter into force upon the expiry of ten calendar days after the day of the first 
official publication); dated 03.01.2022 № 101-VII (shall be enforced upon expiration 
of sixty calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 06.04.2024 
№ 71-VIII (shall enter into force sixty calendar days after the date of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 2. Water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
       1. The water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan is based on the 
Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan and consists of this Code and other 
regulatory legal acts of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. If the international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan establish the 
rules other than those contained in this Code, the rules of international treaties are 
applied.  
Article 3. Goals and tasks of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
       1. The goals of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan are 
achievement and maintaining of environmentally safe and economically optimal level 
of water use and protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal 
for protection and improvement of living conditions of the population and the 
environment.  
       2. The tasks of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be:  
       1) implementation of the state policy for use and protection of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal;  
       2) regulation of water relations, the relations in water supply area and wastewater 
disposal;  
       3) provision of the legal framework to support and develop sustainable water use 
and to protect water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal;  
       4) establishment of the basic principles and directions for use and protection of 
water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal;  
       5) management of relations in exploration, development, rational and complex use 
and protection of water resources, irrigation and drainage systems and water 
management facilities;  


--- PAGE 10 ---

       6) development of irrigation and hydro-technical melioration of lands;  
      7) protection of population and management facilities from emergencies at the 
water management facilities and the effects, caused by them. 
      Footnote. Article 3 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
Article 4. Water fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
      Water fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan includes the complex of all water 
bodies, located within the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan and included or to 
be included in the state water cadastre. 
Article 5. Water sites 
      The water bodies of the Republic of Kazakhstan include water concentrations in 
the land surface and subsurface of the earth, which have borders, volume and water 
regime. They are: seas, rivers, equated to them canals, lakes, glaciers and other surface 
and underground water bodies. 
      Footnote. Article 5 of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 27.12.2017 № 
126-VI (shall be enforced upon expiration of  six months after the day of its first 
official publication). 
 
Article 6. Water resources  
       Water resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan are the stocks of surface and 
underground waters, concentrated in the water bodies that are used or may be used.  
Article 7. The lands of water fund  
       1. The lands of the water fund belong to the people of Kazakhstan. The right of 
ownership is exercised by the state on behalf of the people of Kazakhstan. However, 
the exercise of property rights by the state is realised via the state ownership regime 
serving the interests of the people of Kazakhstan.  
       2. The land plots of the water fund lands, occupied by water facilities (irrigation 
and drainage systems) of inter-district (regional) and inter-farm (district) significance, 
as well as the irrigation facilities, serving the land plot of one entity, may be in a 
private property of the citizens and non-state legal entities of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan in case of privatization of these facilities.  
       3. The land plots, listed in paragraph 2 of this Article, serving two or more land 
owners or land users, are given to them under the common ownership or common land 
use rights.  
      4. The procedure for granting the land of the water fund for ownership or land use 
shall be regulated by the land legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 


--- PAGE 11 ---

      Footnote. Article 7 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 9 
January, 2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated October 28, 2019 
№ 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first 
official publication); № 157-VII of 05.11.2022 (shall enter into force ten calendar days 
after the date of its first official publication). 
 
Article 8. Ownership right for the water fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
      1. The right of ownership of the water fund of the Republic of Kazakhstan is 
exercised exclusively by the state for the benefit of the people of Kazakhstan. 
      2. The right to own, use and dispose of the water fund for the benefit of the people 
of Kazakhstan is exercised by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      3. The actions of individual and legal entities, violating the right of the state 
ownership for water bodies, are void and entail responsibility, provided for by the 
Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 8 as amended by Law № 157-VII of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
of 05.11.2022 (shall be enacted ten calendar days after the date of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 9. Principles of water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
       The water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be based on the 
following principles:  
       1) recognition of the state significance of the waters, which are the ground for life 
and activity of the population;  
       2) primary drinking water supply in the required quantity and the quality assured;  
       3) fair and equal access of the population to water;  
       4) an integrated and rational water use with introduction of modern technologies, 
allowing to reduce water intake and minimize harmful effects of waters;  
       5) the use of water bodies and their protection;  
       6) fees for special water use;  
       7) compensation for damages, caused by violation of the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       8) inevitability of responsibility for violation of the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       9) transparency and public involvement in resolving the problems in use and 
protection of water resources;  
       10) availability of information on the status of water resources of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan;  


--- PAGE 12 ---

      11) the use of trans-boundary waters on the basis of international standards and 
international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan; 
      12) continuity and interconnection of water supply and water discharge in 
engineering and construction; 
      13) service payment of water supply and (or) water discharge. 
      Footnote. Article 9 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication). 
 
Article 10. Relations in use and protection of water fund, water supply and 
wastewater disposal, regulated by the water or other legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan  
      Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2) 
      1. The Water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan regulates relations in the 
field of usage and protection of water fund, management of water fund and water 
economy systems, water supply and water discharge, dam safety, irrigation and 
drainage works and other water relations. 
       2. The relations in terms of lands, forests, flora and fauna, air, arising from the use 
and protection of water bodies, are regulated by the special legislation and this Code.  
       3. The relations, arising from ensuring of environmental, sanitary and 
epidemiological safety of water bodies and prevention of harmful effects of economic 
and other activities on the natural water ecosystems, are regulated by the 
environmental legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan and legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan on sanitary-epidemiological welfare of the population, and by 
this Code.  
      4. Relations in the field of state geological study and exploration of underground 
waters, protection of underground structures from harmful effects of water are 
regulated by the Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan "On Subsoil and Subsoil Use" 
and the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on civil protection, respectively. 
      5. The relations, arising in prevention and liquidation of emergency situations of 
natural and man-made origin on water bodies, with the exception of issues related to 
dam safety shall be regulated by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on civil 
protection. 
       6. The relations, arising in shipping and navigation area shall beregulated by the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on water transport.  
       7. The relations, arising in marine waters use area shall be regulated by this Code 
and international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan.  


--- PAGE 13 ---

       8. The relations, associated with the use and protection of trans-boundary waters 
shall be regulated by this Code, the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, as well 
as the international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 10, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-
V (the order of enforcement see Article 2); № 126-VI dated 27.12.2017 (shall be 
enforced upon expiration of six months after the date of its first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 2. Objects of water relations  
Article 11. The objects of water relations 
       1. The objects of water relations are the water bodies, water facilities and the 
lands of the water fund.  
       2. Water bodies shall be divided into:  
       1) the surface water bodies;  
       2) underground water bodies;  
       3) marine waters of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       4) trans-boundary waters.  
       3. depending on the types of use, the water bodies are divided into:  
       1) water bodies of public use;  
       2) water bodies of the joint use;  
       3) water bodies of solidary use;  
      4) water bodies of the specially protected areas; 
       5) water bodies of the special national significance;  
       6) water bodies of the state forest fund.  
      Footnote. Article 11, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
25.01.2012 No 548-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication.)  
 
Article 12. Surface water bodies  
       1. Surface water bodies shall be divided into:  
      1) water bodies - rivers and canals, lakes, reservoirs, ponds and other inland 
waters, equivalent to them and territorial waters; 
       2) glaciers, wetlands.  
       2. Surface water bodies consist of the surface waters, the bed and the banks.  
Article 13. Underground water sites 
      Groundwater bodies include: 
      1) Groundwater basin; 
      2) deposits and sections of underground waters; 


--- PAGE 14 ---

      3) Aquifers and complexes; 
      4) natural outlet of groundwater on land (springs). 
      Footnote. Article 13 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
27.12.2017 № 126-VI (shall be eenforced upon the expirtion of six months after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 14. Marine waters  
       1. The marine waters of the Republic of Kazakhstan are the waters of the Caspian 
and Aral seas within the state border of the Republic of Kazakhstan, unless otherwise 
is stipulated by the international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      2. (Is excluded)  
      Footnote. Article 14 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13.  
 
Article 15. Trans boundary waters  
       1. Trans boundary waters are the surface and underground water bodies that mark 
and (or) cross the state border of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. The order of use and protection of trans boundary waters shall established by 
this Code, the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the state border and the 
international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 16. The water bodies of the general use  
       1. All water bodies are the objects of the general use, unless otherwise provided 
by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. At the water bodies, the general use shall be carried out in the order, established 
by this Code.  
       3. Restricting the use of water objects of the general use shall be permitted in the 
cases, provided for by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 17. Water objects of the joint use  
       1. The water objects, provided wholly or partially to the individual or legal 
entities for the joint use shall be the water bodies of the joint use.  
       2. When using water bodies of the joint use, the interests of water users, located 
down the watercourse shall be satisfied first.  
       3. The water users that use the joint water bodies shall be obliged to take into 
account the mutual interests, not to impede exercise of the water rights and not to 
harm each other.  
      4. Joint use water objects shall be provided by local executive bodies of the 
regions, city of republican significance, the capital, district, city of regional 
significance in the manner, established by the authorized body. 


--- PAGE 15 ---

       5. General water use at the joint water bodies shall be carried out in the order, 
specified by this Code.  
      Footnote. Article 17 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 18. Water objects of solitary use  
       1. The water objects, provided wholly or partially to an individual or a legal entity 
for solidary use shall be the water bodies of solitary use.  
       2. The water objects of solitary use may be used as public water bodies in the 
order, prescribed by this Code.  
Article 19. Water bodies of the specially protected natural areas  
       The order of formation, the regime of protection of the water resources of the 
specially protected natural areas and their use, as well as the conditions for activity in 
them shall be established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the 
specially protected natural areas.  
Article 19-1. Water bodies of the state forest reserve  
       1. The order of formation, the regime of protection of the water objects of the 
state forest reserve and the conditions for activity in them shall be defined by the water 
and forest legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. The regimes of protection of the territories of the state forest reserve, adjacent 
to the water bodies shall be established in order to keep the water bodies in the 
condition, meeting sanitary-hygienic and environmental requirements, as well as to 
prevent pollution and depletion of the surface waters, in compliance with the forest 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       3. The water bodies of the state forest reserve shall be provided for use in 
accordance with this Code.  
      Footnote. Chapter 2 is supplemented by Article 19-1 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 25.01.2012 No 548-IV (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication.)  
 
Article 20. Water objects of the special state significance  
       1. The water bodies of the special national significance shall be the natural water 
bodies, influencing the environment and economy of the region and requiring a special 
legal regulation regime for economic activity.  
       2. The list of the water bodies of the national significance and the peculiarities of 
the legal regulation regime for economic activity shall be defined by the Government 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  


--- PAGE 16 ---

Article 21. Turnover capacity of the water bodies and the lands of the water fund  
       Turnover of the water bodies, the lands of the water fund, except for the lands, 
specified in paragraph 2 of Article 7 of this Code, as well as the purchase, sale, pledge 
and other transactions, resulting in alienation of the water bodies and the lands, 
occupied by them, shall not be permitted.  
 Section 2. The right to use the water bodies. The right of ownership and other rights to the water 
facilities  
Chapter 3. The right to use the water bodies  
Article 22. The right to use the water bodies  
       1. Individual and legal entities have the right to use the water bodies in the manner 
of a special, solitary or joint use, established by the water legislation of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan.  
       2. Water objects shall be provided to the individual and legal entities under the 
following rights:  
       1) for a short-term use;  
       2) for a long-term use.  
       3. The right for a short-term use is provided for up to five years, the right for a 
long-term use is provided for five - forty-nine years.  
       4. The individual and legal entities, who received the water bodies for use, cannot 
dispose the right to use the water body.  
      Footnote. Article 22, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV.  
 
Article 23. Water easement  
       1. Water easement on water bodies is in public and private forms.  
       2. Everyone may use the water objects of the general use; in this case the public 
water easement is an integral part of the right to use the water body.  
       3. Public water easement for a water body, which is not a public water body, may 
arise from the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the act of the local executive 
body of the oblast (town of the republican status, the capital) or the announcement of 
the order for use of the water body by individual or legal entities, who received it for 
use.  
       4. The right for a long-term or short-term use of a water body may be limited in 
favor of other interested persons (private water servitude).  
       5. Private water servitude is established on the same grounds as the public water 
servitude, and may be established on the basis of a court judgment.  
       6. Public and private water servitudes may be established in order to:  
       1) intake water without applying facilities, technical equipment and devices;  


--- PAGE 17 ---

       2) provide watering and driving of cattle, fishery management;  
       3) use water bodies as a waterway for ferries, boats and other small vessels.  
       7. In order to implement the water easements, the permits for the special water use 
shall not be required.  
      Footnote. Article 23, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.01.2007 No 222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of six 
months after its first official publication); dated 21.01.2010 No 242-IV (the order of 
enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
 Chapter 4. The ownership right and other rights to water facilities  
Article 24. Ownership right to the water facilities  
       1. Water facilities may be in the state or private property.  
       2. The relations, associated with the use, possession and disposal of water 
facilities, that are privately owned, shall be regulated by the civil legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, unless otherwise provided in this Code.  
Article 25. Water facilities of the particular strategic significance  
      1. The water facilities of the particular strategic significance shall be in the state 
property and may not be leased, trust management, and shall not be subject to 
alienation, except for the water facilities of the particular strategic significance, 
specified in paragraph 2 of this Article. 
      2. Water intakes facilities, pumping stations, water treatment facilities, providing 
water supply of cities, shall be state-owned, shall not be subject to alienation and may 
be leased and trust management in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 
      3. The list of the water facilities of particular strategic significance, including those 
that may be leased and trust management, shall be determined by the Government of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 25 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 04.07.2013 № 131-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication); as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 03.07.2017 № 86-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication). 
 
Article 26. Water facilities in the republican property  
       The water facilities that are in the republican property shall be assigned to the 
state water management organizations.  


--- PAGE 18 ---

      The list of water management facilities which belong to republican property is 
determined by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan upon submission of the 
authorized body, as well as the authorized body for subsoil study. 
       The water facilities that are in the republican property may be leased, placed into 
trust and privatized in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 27. Water facilities in the communal property  
       1. Water facilities that are in communal ownership shall be assigned to the public 
utilities enterprises, and, in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, may be provided for leasing, trust management, free use, except for the 
water facilities that are of particular strategic significance.  
       2. Water facilities of particular strategic significance, namely the water intake 
structures, pumping stations, water treatment facilities, providing water supply of 
towns that are in communal ownership shall be assigned to the public utilities, and 
shall not subject to alienation and may be leased and placed into trust management in 
accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 27 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
04.07.2013 No 131-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication).  
 
Article 28. The ownership right for a drinking water supply system  
       Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
       1. Drinking water supply systems may be in the republican, communal property 
and in the property of individuals and legal entities.  
       2. Operation of drinking water supply systems that are in the republican property 
shall be carried out by the state organizations.  
       Operation of water supply systems that are in communal ownership shall be 
carried out by the state and other organizations.  
       3. Some of the drinking water supply systems may be a part of housing 
condominiums.  
Article 29. Water facilities, intended for agricultural water users 
       1. The water facilities, designed to render services to the agricultural water users 
may be in the state or private property.  
       2. The state-owned water facilities, designed to serve the agricultural water users, 
may be leased, placed into trust management, free use, as well as sold or donated to 
the water users or their associations, maintaining these facilities, in the order and 
under the conditions, established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 30. Interim state management of the water facilities  


--- PAGE 19 ---

       1. In case of a threat to the national security interests, the life and health of the 
citizens and in order to stabilize certain water facilities of the special strategic 
significance for economy of the country or the region, upon the recommendation of 
the authorized body for the state property management, the Government of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan may initiate an interim state management in relation to these 
structures.  
       2. The order of initiation of the interim state management for the water facilities, 
referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be defined by the Government of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 31. State registration of the rights to the water facilities  
       Footnote. The title of Article 31 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 25.03.2011 No 421-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication.)  
       1. The rights to the water facilities shall subject to compulsory state registration in 
accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the state registration 
of the real estate rights.  
       2. The state registration of the rights to the water facilities shall be carried out 
under the presence of a passport for the facility, the form of which shall be specified 
by the authorized body.  
      Footnote. Article 31, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
25.03.2011 No 421-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication.)  
 
Article 32. Responsibility of owners of water facilities  
      1. The owners of water facilities shall be responsible for compliance with the 
operation mode of water facilities, as well as the requirements established by 
regulatory legal acts in the field of dam safety. 
      2. Control over the observance by the owners of the operating mode of water 
management facilities, as well as the requirements established by regulatory legal acts 
in the field of dam safety, is carried out by the department of the authorized 
body and basin inspectorates for regulating the use and protection of water resources. 
      Footnote. Article 32 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015); a change made 
law s RK of 28.10.2019 number 268 VI- (put into effect after ten calendar days after 
its first official publication). 
 
 Section 3. The state regulation in use and protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater 
disposal  


--- PAGE 20 ---

       Footnote. The title of the Section 3, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
 Chapter 5. The state management in use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of Chapter 5 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
Article 33. The state management in use and protection of water resources, water 
supply and wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
      1. State administration in the field of use and protection of water resources, water 
supply and wastewater disposal shall be carried out by the President of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the authorized body, 
the department of the authorized body, the authorized body in the field of public 
utilities, local representative and executive bodies of regions ( cities of republican 
significance, the capital ) within its competence, established by the Constitution , this 
Code, other laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan, acts of the President of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan and the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
       2. The management structure for the use and protection of water resources, taking 
into account complexity and subordination shall be divided into the following levels:  
       1) the interstate;  
       2) the state;  
       3) the basin;  
       4) the territorial.  
       3. The state bodies may involve citizens and public organizations in developing 
programs and conducting actions for the rational use and protection of the water 
resources.  
      Footnote. Article 33, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 05.07.2011 No 452-IV (shall be enforced from 13.10. 2011); dated 22.07.2011 
No 479-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be 
enforced upon the expiration  after ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 


--- PAGE 21 ---

Article 34. Basic principles of the state management in use and protection of 
water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal  
      Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2). 
       The state management in use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal shall be based on the following principles:  
       1) the state regulation and control over the use and protection of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal;  
       2) sustainable water consumption - a composition of careful, rational and complex 
use and protection of waters;  
       3) creation of optimal conditions for water use, keeping of the ecological 
sustainability of the environment, and sanitary-epidemiological safety of the 
population;  
      4) basin management; 
       5) distribution of functions of the state control and management in use and 
protection of water resources and functions of the economic use of water resources.  
      Footnote. Article 33, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
 
Article 35. The main tasks of the state management in use and protection of 
water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
       The main tasks of the state management in use and protection of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal shall be:  
       1) the analysis and assessment of water supply sectors of the economy, condition 
of water supply and wastewater disposal at the rural settlements, detection of 
deficiencies and selection of measures for their resolving;  
       2) selection of the available water resources, their quality and availability of the 
rights to use them;  
      3) develop the main directions for improving technologies in the field of water 
supply, sanitation and water protection, including for adaptation to climate change; 
       4) forecast and organization of events to increase the volumes of the available 
water resources and their rational redistribution to cover the water deficit;  
       5) establishment of the water use structure with distribution of water resources to 
meet the priority needs for water, depending on the dryness of the year;  
       6) limitation of water use and discharge of return waters on the scientifically 
based standards;  


--- PAGE 22 ---

       7) planning and observance of environmental requirements;  
       8) monitoring over the quantity and quality condition of water bodies and the 
regime for their use;  
       9) effective management of water bodies and water facilities, that are state-owned;  
       10) development of water services market;  
       11) with the neighboring countries, the joint management in use and protection of 
trans-boundary waters;  
      12) Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 03.07.2013 No 
124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
 
       13) ensuring the safety of water systems and facilities;  
      14) monitoring of water systems and facilities, as well as their compliance with the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan; 
      15) ensuring a balance of interests of the participants of legal relations in the field 
of water supply and water discharge; 
      16) balance of rights, duties and interests of water consumers and organizations for 
water supply and (or) water discharge; 
      17) arrangement of conditions for introduction and priority development of 
energy-saving and water-saving technologies; 
      18) State support for reconstruction and development of water supply and water 
discharge, systems, conducting research, projecting in the field of water supply and 
water discharge. 
      Footnote. Article 35, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 03.07.2013 No 
124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-VI (shall 
enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
 Chapter 6. Competence of the state bodies in use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of Chapter 6 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
Article 36. Competence of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
      Footnote. Title of the Article is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication). 


--- PAGE 23 ---

       The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall:  
       1) develop the main directions of the state policy in use and protection of water 
resources, water supply and wastewater disposal areas;  
      1-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      1-2) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      2) arrange management of the water facilities, that are in the republican property;  
      3) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      4) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      5) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      6) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      7) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      8) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      8-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      9) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 239-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      10) (Is excluded)  
 
       11) approves the regulations for water relations between the regions of the 
country;  


--- PAGE 24 ---

       12) cooperate with foreign states and international organizations on use and 
protection of trans-boundary waters in accordance with the legislation of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan;  
      12-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
 
      12-2) approve general scheme of integrated use and protection of water resources; 
      13) (Is excluded);  
      14) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      15) Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 10.01.2011 No 
383-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
      15-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      16) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      17) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      18) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      19) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
      19-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.10.2015 № 
376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); 
      19-2) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.10.2015 № 
376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); 
      19-3) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.10.2015 № 
376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); 
      20) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 


--- PAGE 25 ---

publication); 
      20-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.10.2015 № 
376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); 
      20-2) excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 03.01.2022 № 
101-VII (shall be enforced upon expiration of sixty calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication); 
 
      21) carry out other functions, assigned to it by the Constitution, the Law s of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan and the acts of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 36, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 19.12.2007 No 11 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 10.07.2009 
No 180-IV; dated 10.01.2011 No 383-IV ( shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 05.07.2011 No 452-IV (shall be 
enforced from 13.10.2011); dated 22.07.2011 No 479-IV (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 13.06.2013 No 
102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015); dated 
16.05.2014 № 203-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after its first 
official publication); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
29.10.2015 № 376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); dated 03.01.2022 № 101-
VII (shall be enforced upon expiration of sixty calendar days after the day of its first 
official publication). 
 
 Article 37. Competence of the authorized body, department of the authorized body 
      Footnote. The title of Article 37 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
       1. The authorized body shall:  
       1) involve in development and implementation of the state policy in use and 
protection of water resources, water supply, wastewater disposal within its 
competence;  
      1-1) involve in coordination and management of the local executive bodies for use 
and protection of water reserves, water supply and wastewater disposal out of the 
settlements; 
      1-2) evaluate vulnerability to climate change within its competence; 


--- PAGE 26 ---

      1-3) identify, within its competence, priorities and measures for adaptation to 
climate change; 
      1-4) implement climate change adaptation measures within its competence; 
      1-5) monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of climate change adaptation measures 
defined within its competence and adjust these measures based on monitoring and 
assessment; 
      2) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 03.07.2013 No 
124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
 
      3) develop the schemes for a complex use and protection of water resources in the 
basins of major rivers and other water bodies in the country; 
      3-1) develops and approves safety criteria for water management systems and 
structures, rules for determining safety criteria for water management systems and 
structures; 
      3-2) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 22.07.2011 No 
479-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
      3-3) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 22.07.2011 No 
479-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
      3-4) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 05.07.2011 No 
452-IV (shall be enforced from 13.10.2011);  
      4) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan,dated 13.01.2014 No 
159-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
      4-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 13.01.2014 No 
159-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
 
      4-2) coordinate the specific power requirement s of water consumption and water 
discharge; 
      4-3) develop and approve the methodology for development of specific power 
requirement of water consumption and water discharge; 
      5) develop and approve the model rules for general water use; 
      5-1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 16.05.2014 № 
203-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after its first official publication); 
      6) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 16.05.2014 № 203-


--- PAGE 27 ---

V (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after its first official publication); 
 
      6-1) develop and approve the application form for obtaining permission for special 
water consumption and the form of permission for special water consumption; 
      7) Approves water use limits by basins and oblasts (cities of republican 
importance, the capital); 
       7-1) approve the method of calculating fees for use of surface water resources, 
established by the tax legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       7-2) determine the procedure on lease and trust management of water facilities;  
      7-3) determine the procedure for ensuring safety of water systems and facilities; 
      7-4) determine the procedure for providing water bodies in a separate or joint use 
on competitive basis; 
      7-5) develop and approve the procedure for coordinating the location of enterprises 
and other facilities, as well as the conditions for producing construction and other 
works on water bodies, water protection zones and lanes; 
      7-6) develop and approve rules for navigation and production of economic, 
research, survey and fishing works in territorial waters; 
      7-7) develop and approve the rules for operation of water facilities located directly 
on water bodies; 
      7-8) develop and approve primary water accounting rules; 
      7-9) develop and approve a list of critical group of water supply systems that shall 
be non-alternative sources of drinking water supply; 
      7-10) determine the procedure for development and approval of general and basin 
schemes for the integrated use and protection of water resources and water balances; 
       8) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan,dated 13.06.2013 No 
102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
       9) conduct the state control over the use and protection of water resources;  
      10) (is excluded) 
 
      11) determine the procedure for keeping state recording of waters and their use, 
the state water cadaster and the state monitoring of water bodies, carry out the state 
recording of waters and their use, keeping of the state water cadaster and the state 
monitoring of water bodies; 
       12) create a database of water bodies and provides access to it for all the 
interested persons;  
      13) approve the regime of use of water facilities and drinking water sources; 


--- PAGE 28 ---

      13-1) develops and approves the rules for the operation of water management, 
irrigation and drainage systems and structures; 
       14) organize the design, survey, research and development works in use and 
protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal outside the 
settlements;  
      15) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 13.01.2014 No 
159-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
 
       16) organize the operation of water facilities, water structures, that are in the 
republican property;  
       17) consider the cases on administrative violations in water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       18) prepare and implements investment projects in the water sector;  
      19) (is excluded) 
 
       20) take part in development of priority directions of inter-state cooperation in use 
and protection of water resources;  
      20-1) participate in the development, definition and coordination of a sensitivity 
map and an index of environmental sensitivity to oil spills together with interested 
state bodies in the order determined by the authorized body in the field of 
environmental protection; 
       21) cooperate with neighboring countries on regulation of water relations, rational 
use and protection of trans-boundary waters in accordance with the legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
      22) develop and approve the rules for establishing the water protection zones and 
strips; 
      23) develop a general scheme for integrated use and protection of water resources; 
      23-1) develop and approve basin schemes for integrated use and protection of 
water resources and water balances; 
      24) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 13.06.2013 No 
102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
      25) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.09.2014 № 
239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
 
       26) provide methodological support for water management organizations;  


--- PAGE 29 ---

       27) establish the procedure for certification of hydro land reclaiming systems and 
water management facilities, as well as the passport’s format;  
      28) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.12. 2014 № 
269-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015); 
 
      28-1) develop and approve the requirements for organizations certified for the 
right to work in the field of dam safety; 
      28-2) conduct certification of organizations for the right to work in the field of 
dam safety; 
      28-3) develop and approve the rules that determine the criteria for classifying 
dams as declared, and the rules for developing a dam safety declaration; 
      28-4) develop and approve regulatory legal acts in the field of dam safety; 
      28-5) develops and approves the rules for performing a multi-factor inspection of 
hydraulic structures and main equipment; 
      The department of the authorized body carries out its activities within the 
competence established by the authorized body. 
      29) fulfill other functions, provided by this Code, other Laws of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, the acts of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the 
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      The department of the authorized body carries out its activities within the 
competence established by the authorized body. 
      2. Decisions of the authorized body, department of the authorized body and basin 
inspectorates for the regulation of the use and protection of water resources, adopted 
within their competence, are binding on all individuals and legal entities. 
      Footnote. Article 37, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 10.01.2006 No 116 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2 of 
the Law No 116); dated 09.01.2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 12.01.2007 No 222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after its official 
publication); dated 10.12.2008 No 101-IV (shall be enforced from 01.01.2009); dated 
12.02.2009 No 132 - IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 17.07.2009 No 
188-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 21.01.2010 No 242-IV (the order 
of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 19.03.2010 No 258-IV; dated 06.01.2011 No 378-IV 
(shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); 
dated 10.01.2011 No 383-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication); dated 05.07.2011 No 452-IV (shall be enforced from 
13.10.2011); dated 22.07.2011 No 479-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 25.01.2012 No 548-IV (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 


--- PAGE 30 ---

10.07.2012 No 36-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 13.06.2013 No 102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
13.01.2014 No 159-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015); 
dated 16.05.2014 № 203-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after its first 
official publication); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 07.11.2014 № 248-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
29.12.2014 № 269-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015); dated 29.10.2015 № 376-V 
(shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); dated 29.03.2016 № 479-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of twenty one calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after its 
first official publication); № 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the 
expiration of  ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 
October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
the day of its first official publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-VI (shall enter into 
force from 01.07.2021); dated 25.01.2021 № 411-VI (shall enter into force upon the 
expiry of ten calendar days after the day of the first official publication); от 
23.02.2021 № 11-VII (the order of entrance into force -Article. 2). 
 
Article 37-1. Competence of the authorized body in public utilities  
       The authorized body in public utilities shall:  
       1) involve in development and implementation of the state policy in water supply 
area and wastewater disposal within the settlements;  
       1-1) carry out coordination and organizational supervision of the local executive 
bodies for use and protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal 
within the settlements;  
       2) develop and approve the normative and technical documentation within its 
competence;  
       3) organize a methodical support in water supply and wastewater disposal within 
the settlements;  
       4) arrange the design, survey, applied research and development works in water 
supply area and wastewater disposal within the settlements;  
      5) develop and approve the rules for use of water supply and water discharge 
systems within the settlements; 


--- PAGE 31 ---

      6) develop and approve the rules for wastewater acceptance to the water discharge 
system in the settlements; 
      7) develop and approve the technical operation rules for water supply and water 
discharge systems of the settlements; 
      8) develop and approve the standard calculation rules for water services 
consumption and (or) water discharge for the consumers, that do not have metering 
devices; 
       8-1) develop and approve the procedure for subsidizing the cost of drinking water 
supply services of the particularly special group and local water supply systems, which 
are the non-alternative sources of drinking water;  
      8-2) develop and approve the procedure for leasing and trust management of water 
facilities that provide water supply to cities and rural settlements; 
      8-3) develop and approve the rules for selection, installation and operation of 
water metering devices in water supply and water discharge systems; 
      8-4) develop and approve the rules for credit to construction, reconstruction and 
modernization of water supply and water discharge systems in coordination with the 
central authorized body for budget planning; 
      8-5) develop and approve the rules for subsidizing the construction, reconstruction 
and modernization of water supply and water discharge systems in coordination with 
the central authorized body for budget planning; 
      8-6) provide credit and subsidization for the construction, reconstruction and 
modernization of water supply and water discharge systems; 
      8-7) coordinates local executive bodies of regions, cities of republican 
significance, the capital when subsidizing the costs of water supply and sewerage 
organizations for repayment and servicing of loans from international financial 
organizations involved in the implementation of projects to expand, modernize, 
reconstruct, renovate, maintain existing assets and create new assets in settlements; 
      8-8) approves the rules for subsidizing the costs of water supply and sanitation 
organizations 
to 
repay 
and 
service 
loans 
from 
international 
financial 
organizations involved in the implementation of projects for the expansion, 
modernization, reconstruction, renovation, maintenance of existing assets and the 
creation of new assets in settlements; 
      8-9) develop and approve a methodology for calculating the amount of fees for one 
cubic meter of supplied drinking water to the population from especially important 
group and local water supply systems that are non-alternative sources of drinking 
water supply, according to lists approved respectively by the authorized body or local 


--- PAGE 32 ---

executive bodies of the regions, in agreement with the authorized body that exercises 
leadership in the areas of natural monopolies; 
      9) conduct other functions, provided by this Code, other Law s of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, the acts of the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the 
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. The Code is supplemented by Article 37-1 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 22.07.2011 No 479-IV (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); as amended by the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 25.01.2012 No 548-IV (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 13.06.2013 No 
102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
19.04.2019 № 249-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication); dated 25.01.2021 № 411-VI (shall enter into force 
upon the expiry of ten calendar days after the day of the first official publication). 
 
Article 38: Competence of local representative bodies of oblasts (cities of 
republican importance, the capital) in the field of use and protection of the water 
fund, water supply and water disposal 
      Footnote. The title of Article 38, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 
28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of ten calendar days after 
the date of its first official publication). 
       Local representative bodies of oblasts (cities of republican importance, the 
capital):  
       1) establish the rules for general water use, taking into account the regional 
conditions on the standard rules basis;  
      2) (is excluded)  
      3) Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 03.07.2013 No 
124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
 
       4) establish a procedure for granting for use and withdrawal of water facilities, 
that are in communal property;  
       5) approve the price rates for use of water from surface water sources;  


--- PAGE 33 ---

       6) carry out other functions to ensure the rights and interests of citizens in 
accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Local representative bodies of the regions shall approve the amount of fees for one 
cubic meter of drinking water supplied to the population from especially important 
group and local water supply systems, which shall be non-alternative sources of 
drinking water supply, according to lists approved by the authorized body or local 
executive bodies of the regions, respectively. 
      Footnote. Article 38, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see 
Art. 2); dated 05.07.2011 No 452-IV (shall be enforced from 13.10.2011); dated 
30.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the 
expiration of ten calendar days after the date of its first official publication); dated 
25.01.2021 № 411-VI (shall enter into force upon the expiry of ten calendar days after 
the day of the first official publication). 
 
Article 39. Competence of local executive bodies of oblasts (cities of republican 
importance the capital) in the field of use and protection of the water fund, water 
supply and water disposal 
      Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 
28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of ten calendar days after 
the date of its first official publication). 
      Local executive bodies of oblasts (cities of republican importance, the capital): 
       1) manage the water facilities, that are in communal property, and take measures 
for their protection;  
       1-1) keep records of water facilities, owned by the state; when the unclaimed 
water facilities are found, the procedures, provided by the civil legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, are conducted;  
       1-2) implement the state policy in use and protection of the water resources, water 
supply and wastewater disposal;  
      2) establish water protection zones, bands and zones of sanitary protection of 
drinking water sources in coordination with the basin inspections on regulation of use 
and protection of water resources, the state body in the sphere of sanitary and 
epidemiological welfare of the population; 
      2-1) establish the regime and special conditions for the economic use of water 
protection zones and strips in agreement with the basin inspectorates for the regulation 
of the use and protection of water resources; 


--- PAGE 34 ---

      3) provide water bodies for separate or joint use on a competitive basis in the 
manner determined by the authorized body; 
       4) take part in the work of the basin councils and in the basin agreement, submit 
the offers on the rational use and protection of water resources, water supply, 
wastewater disposal of settlements to the basin councils’ consideration, study 
recommendations of the basin councils, take measures for their implementation;  
       5) ensure implementation of the actions for the rational use and protection of 
water resources, water supply, wastewater disposal at the settlements, including hydro-
technical melioration, security of water supply systems and facilities;  
      5-1) evaluate vulnerability to climate change within their competence; 
      5-2) define, within their competence, priorities and measures for adaptation to 
climate change; 
      5-3) implement climate change adaptation measures within their competence; 
      5-4) monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of climate change adaptation measures 
defined within their competence and adjust these measures based on monitoring and 
assessment; 
      6) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 03.07.2013 No 
124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication);  
      7) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.03.2016 № 479-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of twenty one calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
 
       7-1) resolve the issues on security of water supply systems and facilities at the 
appropriate territories;  
       7-2) organize actions for disaster liquidation at the water management facilities;  
       8) inform the population about the condition of water bodies, water supply and 
wastewater disposal systems, located at the corresponding territory;  
       9) develop the price rates for use of the surface water resources;  
      10) implement measures to subsidize the cost of water delivery services to 
agricultural producers; 
      10-1) subsidize the costs of water supply and sanitation organizations for 
repayment and servicing of loans of international financial organizations involved in 
the implementation of projects for the expansion, modernization, reconstruction, 
renovation, maintenance of existing assets and the creation of new assets in 
settlements, in the manner determined by the authorized body in the field of 
communal services; 


--- PAGE 35 ---

      11) excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 28.10.2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); 
 
      12) carry out other functions, delegated to the local executive bodies by the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan in the interests of the local state 
management. 
      Local executive bodies of the regions: 
      1) develop and approve a list of particularly important local water supply systems 
that shall be non-alternative sources of drinking water supply; 
      2) develop and submit for approval to the local representative bodies of the regions 
the amount of fees for one cubic meter of supplied drinking water to the population 
from especially important group and local water supply systems, which shall be non-
alternative sources of drinking water supply, according to lists approved respectively 
by the authorized body or local executive bodies of the regions; 
      3) implement measures to subsidize the cost of drinking water supply services 
from especially important group and local water supply systems, which shall be non-
alternative sources of drinking water supply, according to lists approved respectively 
by the authorized body or local executive bodies of the regions; 
      4) provide information to the authorized body in the field of public utilities on the 
approval of the list of especially important local water supply systems that shall be 
non-alternative sources of drinking water supply, including when introducing 
amendments and (or) additions. 
      Footnote. Article 39, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 10.01.2006 No 116 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2 of 
the Law No 116); dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); 
dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 05.07.2011 № 452-IV (shall be enforced from 
13.10.2011); dated 13.06.2013 No 102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
29.10.2015 № 376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); dated 29.03.2016 № 479-V 
(shall be enforced upon expiry of twenty one calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of ten 
calendar days after the date of its first official publication); dated 19.04.2019 № 249-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-
VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021); dated 25.01.2021 № 411-VI (shall enter 


--- PAGE 36 ---

into force upon the expiry of the calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 39-1. Competence of local executive bodies of districts, cities, cities of 
regional significance in the field of use and protection of water fund, water 
supply and water discharge 
      Local executive bodies of district, city of regional significance shall provide water 
bodies located within the territory of the district, city of regional significance, for 
separate use or joint use on  competitive basis in the manner determined by the 
authorized body. 
      Footnote. Chapter 6 is supplemented by the Article 39-1 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 7. Basin Inspections for Regulation of Use and Protection of Water Resources 
      Footnote. The title of Chapter 7 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
Article 40. Tasks and functions of the basin inspection on water resources 
management and protection 
      Footnote. The Title of the Article 40 in the wording of the Law of the RK dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall enter into force upon the expiry of ten calendar days after 
the day of the first official publication). 
       1. Basin Water Management Departments (hereinafter - the basin management 
departments) - the regional bodies (whose activities and functions shall be carried out 
in the territory of two or more oblasts) of the authorized body, that have offices in the 
regions, the main task of which is to carry out the state management in use and 
protection of water resources in the territory of the corresponding basin.  
       2. Basin management departments shall carry out the following functions:  
       1) an integrated management of water resources at the hydrographical basin under 
the watershed management principle;  
       2) coordination of water relations in use of water resources in order to achieve a 
positive economic effect, a reasonable, equitable and ecologically sustainable water 
use;  
       3) preparation and implementation of basin agreements on rehabilitation and 
protection of water bodies within the corresponding basin;  


--- PAGE 37 ---

       4) implementation of the state control over the use and protection of water 
resources, observance of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan by the 
individual and legal entities;  
       5) keeping the state records, the state water cadastre and the state monitoring of 
water bodies in the basins together with the authorized state body for environmental 
protection, the authorized body for study and use of mineral resources;  
      6) issuance, suspension of an action, extension and renewal of a permit for a 
special water use as well as termination of the right to special water use in the manner 
established by this Code; 
      6-1) certify the tax reporting on payment for using water resources of surface 
sources prior to submission to the tax authority; 
       7) coordination of:  
      plans of local executive bodies of oblasts (cities of republican significance, the 
capital) for rational use of water bodies of the respective basin; 
       suggestions for allocation of land plots for construction of enterprises and other 
facilities, influencing the water condition;  
      location of enterprises and other facilities, as well as the conditions for production 
of construction and other works on water bodies, water protection zones and strips; 
       documents on construction, dredging, blasting works for mining, extraction of 
water plants, laying of cables, pipes and other utilities, woodcutting, as well as 
drilling, agricultural, and other activities, carried out at the water bodies, water 
protection zones and strips;  
       the action plans of water users for protection and improvement of water bodies;  
      optimal methods of oil spill elimination, determined on the basis of the analysis of 
the total environmental benefit together with the territorial subdivisions of the 
authorized state body in the field of animal protection, reproduction and use and the 
authorized body in the field of environmental protection; 
       8) participation in the work of the state commissions on commissioning of 
industrial, agricultural and housing objects, influencing the water condition, as well as 
in liquidation of consequences, arising from natural and man-made disasters;  
       9) determination of the limits of water use for water users and for the 
corresponding basin;  
       9-1) arrangement and conduction of a competition for provision of water bodies to 
the solitary or joint use;  
      10) is excluded by the Law of the RK from 27.12.2017 № 126-VI (entered into 
force six months after the day of its first official publication); 
 


--- PAGE 38 ---

       11) monitoring the work of the joint water reservoirs, large water reservoirs of 
interdisciplinary, inter-regional and interstate significance;  
       11-1) control over observance of the established water easements by individual 
and legal entities, using water facilities, provided in the solitary or joint use;  
       12) developing the plans for water intake and water apportioning in interregional, 
trans-regional, inter-state water bodies and control over their fulfillment;  
       13) coordination of the scheme for a complex use and protection of water of the 
corresponding basin, the rules for operation of water objects and water facilities;  
       14) participation in development of water balances for the corresponding basin;  
       15) coordination of proposals on provision of water bodies to the solitary and joint 
use and conditions of water use in them;  
       16) filing in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
submission of a request on termination of financing, designing and construction of 
water supply and other objects, influencing the water condition, carried out with 
violation of the established rules and regulations in use and protection of water 
resources, water supply and wastewater disposal;  
       17) submission of the materials on abuse of the water legislation of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan to the Law enforcement agencies and the court to bring the perpetrators 
to responsibility in accordance with the Law s of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       18) in case of violation of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, to 
file claims to the court for the damages, caused to the state;  
       19) informing the population about the work accomplished for the rational use and 
protection of water resources, the actions, taken to improve the condition and quality 
of waters;  
      20) interaction with local executive bodies of oblasts (cities of republican 
importance the capital) and other interested state bodies on the use and protection of 
the water fund, water supply and sanitation; 
       21) educating and training of population for the rational use and protection of 
water resources;  
      22) (Is excluded) 
 
       23) put a seal water metering devices, installed at the facilities or devices for 
water uptake or discharge by individual and legal entities, having the special right for 
water use;  
      24) organization of work of the basin council, consultations with the members of 
the basin council on use and protection of water resources of a basin, analysis of the 
recommendations, made by the basin council, measures for their implementation, 


--- PAGE 39 ---

bringing of the basin council’s recommendations to the relevant government agencies 
and water users; 
      25) register dam safety declarations to assign registration ciphers. 
      Footnote. Article 40, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 9 January, 2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement 
see Art. 2); dated 12 January, 2007 No 222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of 6 months 
after its official publication); dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement 
see art. 2); dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 10.01.2011 No 383-IV (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 16.05.2014 № 203-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of six 
months after its first official publication); dated 29.03.2016 № 479-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of twenty one calendar days after its first official publication); 
dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after 
its first official publication); dated 27.12.2017 № 126-VI (shall be enforced upon the 
expiration of  six months after the date of its first official publication); dated 
28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of  ten calendar days 
after the date of its first official publication); dated 28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall enter 
into force upon the expiry of ten calendar days after the day of the first official 
publication); от 02.01.2021 № 401-VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 41. Participation of the territorial bodies of the authorized state body for 
environmental protection in implementing the watershed principle of the water 
resources management  
       1. Territorial bodies of the authorized state body for environmental protection in 
implementing the watershed principle of the water resources management shall be 
involved:  
      1) in adjustment of plans for rational use and protection of water bodies on the 
basis of the composed water balances, complex use schemes and protection of water 
resources of the corresponding basin; 
      2) in the monitoring of water bodies of the corresponding basin in conjunction 
with basin inspectorates; 
       3) in the state control for use and protection of water resources within their 
competence;  
       4) in elaboration of basin agreements and monitoring of their implementation at 
the subordinate territory;  
      5) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 03.07.2013 No 
124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 


--- PAGE 40 ---

publication).  
 
       2. Territorial bodies of the authorized state body for environmental protection 
shall implement the watershed principle in water resources management in accordance 
with the approved general basin schemes of a complex use and protection of water 
bodies.  
      Footnote. Article 41 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 42. Basin agreements on restoration and protection of water bodies 
      1. Basin agreements on the restoration and protection of water bodies (hereinafter - 
basin agreements) are concluded between basin inspectorates, local executive bodies 
of regions ( cities of republican significance, the capital) and other entities located 
within the basin of a water body, in order to unite and coordinate their activities, as 
well as the implementation of measures for the restoration and protection of water 
bodies. 
       2. Basin agreements contain obligations of the parties for uniting the efforts and 
means, required for implementation of specific water protection measures, with 
indication of time frames for their execution.  
       3. Preparation of the basin agreements shall be based on the water balances, the 
schemes of the integrated use and protection of water bodies, the documents of the 
State planning system of the Republic of Kazakhstan, research and project 
developments.  
       4. To achieve the goals and tasks of the basin agreements, the individual and legal 
entities may establish foundations under the terms and the order, prescribed by the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the money funds of which are intended for 
rehabilitation and protection of the water bodies.  
      Footnote. Article 42 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication); № 210-VI dated  28.12.2018 
(shall be enforced upon the expiration of  ten calendar days after the date of its first 
official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 43. Basin council  
       1. Basin council is an advisory body, established within the corresponding basin.  


--- PAGE 41 ---

      2. The basin council, headed by the head of the relevant basin inspectorate, 
consists of heads of local representative and executive bodies of regions ( cities 
of republican significance, the capital), heads of territorial bodies of state bodies and 
representatives of water-users. The basin council may also include representatives of 
public associations and their associations. The organization of the work of the basin 
council is entrusted to the basin inspectorate . 
       3. Basin council considers current issues in use and protection of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal, and makes suggestions and recommendations 
to the participants of the basin agreement.  
      Footnote. Article 43, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
№ 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the expiration of  ten calendar 
days after the day of its first official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall 
be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
 Chapter 8. The state planning in use and protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater 
disposal  
       Footnote. The title of Chapter 8, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
Article 44. The tasks of the state planning in use and protection of water 
resources, water supply and wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
       1. The goals of the state planning in the use and protection of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal shall provide:  
      science-based distribution of waters among the water users, taking into account the 
primarily needs in drinking and household waters of people; 
       protection of water resources and prevention of their harmful effects.  
       2. Water balances, the schemes of a complex use and protection of water 
resources shall be drawn up for the state planning in the use and protection of water 
resources, water supply and wastewater disposal, as well as the forecast for use and 
protection of water resources are developed in the schemes for development and 
distribution of production forces and economic sectors.  
      Footnote. Article 44, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 


--- PAGE 42 ---

publication).  
 
Article 45. Water balances  
       1. Water balances are designed to assess presence and use of water resources in 
the basins of water bodies, economic regions and the country as a whole.  
      2. Water balances for the major basins of the rivers and for the whole on the 
Republic shall be developed in the order, established by the authorized body. 
       3. The costs associated with development of water balances, shall be covered by 
the budget.  
      Footnote. Article 45 is amended by the law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 46. Schemes for the integrated use and protection of water resources  
       1. The schemes for the integrated use and protection of water resources shall be 
developed to make decisions on the integrated water resources management.  
      2. Schemes for the integrated use and protection of water resources are developed 
by the department of the authorized body with the involvement of scientific and 
specialized design organizations with the participation of interested state bodies. 
       3. The activities, planned in the integrated schemes shall be aimed at:  
       1) the rational and economic use of water resources through the improvement of 
the production technologies;  
       2) the use of low water and waterless processes;  
       3) reduction of irretrievable losses of water resources in irrigation and water 
supply systems;  
       4) the maximum use of local water resources due to their regulation, inter-basin 
re-distribution of river runoff, reduction of the volumes of the uncontrolled wastewater 
disposal;  
       5) prevention of flooding and under flooding of towns, settlements, farmlands and 
other objects.  
      4. The schemes for the integrated use and protection of water resources shall be 
developed in the order, established by the authorized body and funded by the budget. 
      Footnote. Article 46 as amended by the Law of the republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 


--- PAGE 43 ---

Article 47. Forecast of use and protection of water resources in the schemes for 
development and distribution of production forces and economic sectors  
       1. As a part of the schemes for development and distribution of production forces 
and economic sectors, a forecast shall be elaborated for use and protection of water 
resources with the environmentally acceptable level of burden on water bodies.  
       2. Forecast of use and protection of water resources in the schemes for 
development and distribution of production forces and economic sectors shall be 
developed by the central executive bodies.  
       3. The forecasts for use and protection of water resources in the schemes for 
development and distribution of production forces and economic sectors, developed by 
the central executive bodies shall be agreed with the authorized body for acceptable 
levels of use of the water resources.  
      Footnote. Article 47 as amended by the Law of the republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13.  
 
 Chapter 9. Monitoring and expertise in the use and protection of water resources  
Article 48. Tasks and types of control in the use and protection of water resources  
       1. The goals of control in use and protection of water resources shall be:  
       the monitoring of the status and changes in the waters, caused by economic and 
other activities;  
       the verification of implementing the water protection actions.  
       2. The state, industrial and public control in the use and protection of water 
resources shall be carried out in the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      3. The main tasks of the department of the authorized body and basin 
inspectorates in the implementation of state control are to ensure: 
       1) interaction and coordination of all ministries, agencies, departments, involved 
in the state control within their competence;  
       2) monitoring of the status and changes in the waters, caused by economic and 
other activities, as well as the verification of implementing water protection actions;  
       3) the established order of use of the water fund and its recording;  
       4) water protection duties;  
       5) prevention and elimination of harmful effects on water bodies;  
      6) monitoring of observance of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
by all individual and legal entities. 
      4. State control in the sphere of use and protection of the water fund shall be 
exercised in the form of inspection and preventive control with a visit to the entity 
(facility) under state control and supervision in compliance with the Entrepreneurial 
Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 


--- PAGE 44 ---

      5. Public control in the field of use and protection of the water fund in the part not 
regulated hereunder shall be exercised by entities of public control under the Law of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan “On Public Control”. 
      Footnote. Article 48, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
31.01.2006 No 125; dated 17.07.2009 No 188-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); 
dated 06.01.2011 No 378-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication.); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 29.10.2015 № 
376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); dated 24.05.2018 № 156-VI (shall be 
enforced upon the expiration of  after ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 02.10.2023 № 31-
VIII (shall be enacted six months after its first official publication); dated 06.04.2024 
№ 71-VIII (shall become effective sixty calendar days after its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 49. The bodies, carrying out the state control over the use and protection 
of water resources  
       1. The state control over the use and protection of water resources within their 
competence shall be carried out by:  
      
1) 
the authorized 
body , department 
of 
the authorized 
body and basin 
inspectorates; 
       2) the authorized state body for environmental protection;  
       3) the authorized body for study and utilization of mineral resources;  
      4) the authorized body in the field of civil safety; 
      5) a state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the 
population; 
       6) the authorized state body for veterinary medicine;  
       7) the state body for phytosanitary inspection;  
       8) local executive bodies of oblasts (cities of republican importance, the capital).  
      2. The department of the authorized body coordinates the activities of state bodies 
for the implementation of state control in the field of use and protection of water 
resources. 
      3. The agency of the authorized body and basin inspectorates exercise control 
over: 
       1) the observance of the boundaries of the water protection zones, the set regime 
of economic activity on them and in the specially protected water bodies;  


--- PAGE 45 ---

       2) implementation of the conditions and requirements of the international 
agreements on trans-boundary waters;  
      3) compliance with water consumption and water disposal limits; 
       4) observance of the operation rules for water intake facilities, water supply 
systems and water reservoirs;  
      5) correctness of primary accounting of the amount of water withdrawn from water 
bodies and discharged into them, availability, serviceable condition and observance of 
terms of state certification of equipment and equipment for water consumption and 
discharge accounting, observance of established reporting terms by water users; 
       6) fulfiment of conditions and requirements by the individual and legal entities, 
established by the permits for a special water use, as well as the measures against 
harmful effects of waters (flooding, under flooding, destruction of banks and other 
harmful effects);  
       7) observance of the order, established by the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, to provide a solitary and joint use of water bodies;  
      8) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan № 156-VI dated 
24.05.2018 (to be put into effect upon expiration of ten calendar days after the day of 
its first official publication); 
 
       9) presence of the duly approved design documentation and compliance with it of 
the construction, reconstruction, technical reconstruction of economic sectors’ 
facilities and other activities, related to the use and protection of water bodies and their 
water protection zones;  
      10) prevention of unauthorized use of water bodies. 
      11) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 24.05.2018 № 
156-VI (to be put into effect on the expiration of ten calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication). 
 
      The authorized bodies in the field of environmental protection, in the field of civil 
protection, veterinary medicine, plant quarantine, the state body in the field of sanitary 
and epidemiological well-being of the population and local executive bodies: 
       1) conduct the state control over the use and protection of water resources in 
accordance with their competence;  
       2) inspect and examine the changes in the qualitative and quantitative status of 
water resources;  
       3) take measures to eliminate violations of the water legislation;  
       4) participate in elaboration of the regulations on use and protection of water 
resources;  


--- PAGE 46 ---

       5) in the established order, submit proposals on suspension and prohibition of 
wastewater dumping into the water bodies, conducted with violation of the established 
requirements, as well as on prohibition of work of certain production facilities, shops 
and enterprises, affecting the water condition.  
      Footnote. Article 49 as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 31 January, 2006 No 125; dated 12 January, 2007 
No 222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after the date of its official 
publication); dated 17.01.2014 No 165-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
24.05.2018 № 156-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration after ten calendar days 
after the day of its first official publication); № 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be 
enforced upon the expiration of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 49-1. Organization and conduction of the state control in the use and 
protection of water resources  
       Footnote. Article 49-1 is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 17.07.2009 No 188-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
Article 49-2. The measures against violation of the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan  
       Footnote. Article 49-2 is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 17.07.2009 No 188-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
Article 49-3. Time frames and frequency of the state control in the use and 
protection of water resources  
       Footnote. Article 49-3 is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 17.07.2009 No 188-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
Article 50. The officials, involved the state control in the use and protection of 
water resources  
       1. The officials that in accordance with this Code, are authorized to exercise the 
state control over the use and protection of water resources shall be:  
       The Chief State Inspector of the Republic of Kazakhstan for use and protection of 
water resources, and his deputy, the senior state inspectors of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan for use and protection of water resources and the state inspectors of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan for use and protection of water resources;  


--- PAGE 47 ---

       chief state inspectors for use and protection of water resources of the 
corresponding basin and their deputies, senior state inspectors and the state inspectors 
for use and protection of the water resources of the corresponding basin.  
      2. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 27 July, 2007 No 
315 (shall be enforced from the date of its official publication).  
 
      3. The officials referred to in paragraph 1 of this article, for the implementation of 
state control in the use and protection of the water resources, are provided with the 
appropriate service certificate or identification card. of the established form , a badge , 
technical means in the manner prescribed by the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 50, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated November 26, 2019 № 273-VI (shall be enforced upon 
the expiry of six months after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 51. The rights of the officials, exercising the state control over the use and 
protection of water resources  
       1. The officials, exercising the state control over the use and protection of water 
resources shall be entitled to:  
      1) inspect observance of the requirements of this Code, the acts of the President of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
specify requirements to the state bodies, individuals, officials and legal entities on 
performance of the water legislation standards of the Republic of Kazakhstan, to 
conduct corresponding measures for rational use and protection of water resources, 
observance of the maximum permissible levels of collector and drainage and 
wastewater discharge in the volumes, defined by the normative legal acts of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, organize a laboratory quality control over the water resources 
and wastewater in accordance with the Entrepreneurial Code of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan; 
      2) submit proposals on suspension of permits for special water use and termination 
of the right of special water use in the order, established by the Laws of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan; 
       3) inspect organizations and other objects for the state control, to monitor the 
water resources status, to issue mandatory recommendations on elimination of 
violations of the rules for water resources use and their protection. In case of the 
unauthorized water intake, emergency situations of natural and man-made origin at the 
water bodies, they are to make proposals on suspension of business activities of the 
water users;  


--- PAGE 48 ---

      3-1) monitor compliance with the established water-use limits , the regime of 
retaining hydraulic structures, the rules for the operation of water facilities located 
directly on water bodies, and the operation of water management, irrigation and 
drainage 
systems 
and structures, 
the use 
of 
the boundaries 
of water 
protection zones and strips, the established mode of economic activity on them; 
      3-2) issue recommendations on elimination of the revealed violations of the rules 
for water resources use and their protection; 
       3-3) make a decision to impose an administrative penalty;  
       3-4) file a claim for damages, caused by violation of the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       4) get the necessary information from individuals, officials and legal entities to 
clarify conditions for use and protection of water resources, including the laboratory 
results in the order, established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       5) draw up protocols on administrative violations in the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       6) make proposals to limit, suspend and prohibit waste water discharge into the 
water bodies, conducted with violation of the established requirements, as well as to 
terminate work of certain production facilities, shops and enterprises, adversely 
affecting the water bodies status;  
       7) make proposals to the officials, heads of organizations, on bringing to 
responsibility of those, who have violated the norms and rules for the use and 
protection of water bodies, and submit materials to the appropriate Law enforcement 
bodies to address the issue of bringing to responsibility in accordance with the Law s 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       7-1) make proposals for development of the draft Law s and other normative legal 
acts, regulating relations in the use and protection of water resources;  
      8) (Is excluded). 
 
      2. Decisions taken by officials exercising state control over the use and protection 
of the water fund within their authority are binding on all natural and legal persons and 
may be appealed in accordance with the procedure established by the Laws of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 51, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 31.01.2006 No 125; dated 12.01.2007 No 222 (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of six months from the date of its official publication); dated 
17.07.2009 No 188 -IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 06.01.2011 No 
378-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 10.01.2011 No 383-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 


--- PAGE 49 ---

calendar days after its first official publication); dated 16.05.2014 № 203-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of six months after its first official publication); dated 
29.10.2015 № 376-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2016); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated 29.06.2020 № 351-VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 52. Duties of the officials, exercising the state control over the use and 
protection of water resources  
       The officials, exercising the state control over the use and protection of water 
resources, shall:  
       1) monitor the execution of the requirements of the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       2) interact with the individual and legal entities when monitoring the use and 
protection of water resources;  
       3) inform the state bodies on violations of legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan on use and protection of water resources within their competence;  
       4) assist individual and legal entities in development of measures for the rational 
use and protection of water resources;  
      5) (Is excluded). 
      Footnote. Article 52 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan,dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13.  
 
Article 53. Production control in use and protection of water resources  
       1. Operational control in use and protection of water resources shall be carried out 
on the basis of the rules of the primary recording of water use.  
       2. Operational control in use and protection of water resources is provided by the 
individual and legal entities that have a right for special water use.  
      3. Production control in the field of use and protection of the water fund is carried 
out on the basis of water meters that have passed type approval or metrological 
certification in accordance with the procedure established by the Law of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan "On Ensuring the Uniformity of Measurements". 
      4. Production control over the quality of drinking water and treated wastewater 
shall be carried out by accredited laboratories of the organization for water supply and 
(or) drainage, as well as other accredited laboratories according to the concluded 
agreements. 
      Footnote. Article 53, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
31.01.2006 No 125; dated 09.01.2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 05.07.2011 No 452-IV (shall be enforced from 13.10.2011); dated 15.06.2015 


--- PAGE 50 ---

№ 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); № 184-VI dated 05.10.2018 (shall be enforced upon the expiration of six 
months after the day of its first official publication); dated 30.12.2020 № 397-VI (shall 
enter into force upon the expiry of the calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication).  
 
Article 54. Expertise in use and protection of water fund 
      Footnote. Title of the Article 54 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 29.12.2014 № 269-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015). 
      1. The following types of the expertise shall be carried out in use and protection of 
water fund: 
      1) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.12.2014 № 269-
V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015);  
 
      2) complex non-departmental expertise of engineering -economics objectivities 
and project and estimate documentation for construction and reconstruction, operation, 
conservation and liquidation of economic and other facilities affecting the water 
bodies’ condition; 
      3) the state examination of underground water reserves and geological information 
about the underground water bodies; 
      4) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 11.04.2014 № 189-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
 
       5) the state sanitary-epidemiological and environmental expertise.  
      2. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 29.12.2014 №269-
V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015). 
 
      3. The complex non-departmental expertise of engineering-economics objectivities 
and project and estimate documentation for construction and reconstruction, operation, 
conservation and liquidation of economic and other facilities, influencing the water 
bodies’ condition, shall be carried out to check its compliance with the original data, 
technical specifications and requirements, as well as the provisions of regulatory 
documents approved in the manner determined by the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 
       4. The state expertise of underground water reserves and geological information 
about underground water bodies shall be carried out by the authorized body for study 
and use of mineral resources.  


--- PAGE 51 ---

      5. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 11.04.2014 № 189-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication). 
 
      6. State sanitary-epidemiological and environmental expertise is carried out, 
respectively, by the state body in the field of sanitary-epidemiological welfare of the 
population and by the authorized state body in the field of environmental protection.   
      7. The procedure for carrying out a complex non-departmental expertise 
(engineering-economics objectivities and project-estimate documentation) of projects 
intended for the construction of new facilities, as well as reconstruction (expansion, 
technical upgrade, modernization) or overhaul repairs of existing buildings and 
structures, their complexes, engineering and transport communications shall be carried 
out in the manner determined by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 54, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
26.05.2008 No 34-IV (the order of enforcement See Art. 2); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 29.12.2014 № 269-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015). 
 
 Chapter 10. The requirements, providing the rational use, protection and improvement of water 
condition  
Article 55. Environmental requirements for use of water bodies and water 
facilities  
       Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
       1. Placement of productions and other facilities (buildings, structures, and their 
systems, communications), influencing the water bodies’ condition is made in 
compliance with the environmental requirements, conditions and rules for protection 
of mineral resources, sanitary-epidemiological, industrial safety, rehabilitation and 
rational use of water resources, taking into account the environmental consequences, 
caused by these facilities’ work.  
      2. Construction, reconstruction (expansion, modernization, technical re-equipment, 
re-profiling), operation, conservation, liquidation ( post-utilization ) of objects 
affecting the state of water bodies are carried out in the presence of a positive opinion 
of the authorized state body in the field of environmental protection, the authorized 
body for the study subsoil, a state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological 
welfare of the population and an authorized body in the field of civil protection.  


--- PAGE 52 ---

      3. When performing the construction works, the measures shall be taken on land 
rehabilitation, reclamation and rational use of water resources, land improvement and 
enhancement of the environment. 
      Footnote. Article 55, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of 
ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 56. Requirements for reduction of pollutants discharge into water bodies  
       1. Use and protection of water resources are based on the norming of pollutants in 
the discharge points, on the total normalization of water-related activities of all 
organizations within the corresponding basin, a watercourse or a land plot.  
      2. Requirements to the purification rate and quality of the discharged waters are 
defined by the directions of the possible use of the water body and by the calculations, 
and shall take into account the real condition of the water body, technical and 
economic possibilities and time frames for the planned indexes’ achievement. 
      3. The agency of the authorized body shall develop and approve, in agreement 
with the authorized body in the field of environmental protection for surface water 
objects, water quality standards in them on the basis of a unified system of water 
quality classification in water objects approved by the agency of the authorized body. 
      4. Local executive bodies of regions, cities of republican significance, the capital 
in the field of environmental protection shall developing target indicators of water 
quality in surface water bodies and measures for achieving them based on the 
methodology, approved by the authorized body together with the authorized state body 
for environmental protection. 
      Footnote. Article 56 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after its 
first official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall enter into force upon the 
expiry of the calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 
30.12.2020 № 397-VI (shall enter into force upon the expiry of the calendar days after 
the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 57. Feasibility of the integrated water discharge to meet the requirements 
of economic sectors and environment  
       1. An integrated water discharge shall be carried out, taking into account the 
sanitary and epidemiological and environmental requirements, as well as the needs of 
economic sectors.  
       2. Environmental and sanitary-epidemiological discharges shall be prioritized.  


--- PAGE 53 ---

       3. Environmental water discharge must preserve the natural condition of the water 
body. Apart from keeping of a minimum flow, the environmental water release shall 
provide periodic flushing of water bodies during floods.  
      4. The volumes of environmental and sanitary-epidemiological releases are 
established for the basins of water bodies by the department of the authorized body 
and basin inspections. 
       5. Emergency water release shall maintain the normal water level at the water 
body during floods and flushing of the water bodies’ beds.  
      Footnote. Article 57, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
 Chapter 11. The state recording of surface and underground waters, the state water cadaster, the state 
monitoring of water bodies. Scientific and innovative and informative support of the rational use and 
protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of Chapter 11, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
Article 58. The state recording of the surface and underground waters  
       1. The state recording of the surface and underground waters is a systematic 
estimation and fixation of quantitative and qualitative indicators of water resources, 
available in the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan, in the order, defined by the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. The data of the state recording of the surface and underground waters 
characterize the status of the surface and underground water bodies in qualitative and 
quantitative indexes, the level of their industrial and environmental safety for human 
life and health, their study and use.  
      3. State registration of surface and ground waters is carried out by the department 
of the authorized body together with the authorized body for the study of subsoil and 
the authorized state body in the field of environmental protection. 
      Footnote. Article 58 with the change introduced by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 27.12.2017 № 126-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of six 
months after the day of its first official publication); dated 28.12.2018 № 268-VI (shall 
be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 59. State water cadaster  


--- PAGE 54 ---

       1. The state water cadaster is a set of systematic official data on condition and use 
of water bodies, their water resources, and water users.  
       2. The state water cadaster is kept under a single system and shall be based on the 
data, received from the state recording of waters.  
       3. A water body, included in the state water cadastre, has a passport, containing a 
registration number, name and complex characteristics, indicating physical and 
geographical, geological and hydrological, technical, legal and economic indexes.  
      4. Maintaining the state water cadastre is carried out by the department of the 
authorized body jointly with the authorized body for the study of subsoil, the 
authorized 
state 
body 
in 
the 
field 
of 
environmental 
protection 
and 
hydrometeorological services. 
      5. Water-users are obliged to submit to the basin inspectorates and the authorized 
body for the study of subsoil all the necessary data to be included in the state water 
cadastre. 
      6. The department of the authorized body is obliged to ensure access of interested 
individuals and legal entities to the information contained in the state water cadastre. 
      Footnote. Article 59 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 60. State monitoring of water bodies  
       1. The state monitoring of water bodies is an integral part of the state monitoring 
system for environment and natural resources.  
      2. Monitoring by the State of water bodies is a system of regular observations of 
hydrological, hydrogeological, hydrogeochemical, sanitary-chemical, microbiological, 
parasitological, radiological and toxicological indicators of their state, collection, 
processing and transfer of the data obtained, using Earth remote sensing data, to detect 
negative processes in a timely manner, assess and predict their development, make 
recommendations for the prevention of harmful effects and determine the efficiency of 
the water management measures in place. 
      3. State monitoring of water bodies is carried out by the department of the 
authorized body jointly with the authorized state body in the field of environmental 
protection, the state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the 
population, the authorized body for the study of subsoil, the authorized body in the 
field of space activities according to the jointly developed methodology. 
      Footnote. Article 60 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
08.04.2016 № 490-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry 


--- PAGE 55 ---

of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication); № 167-VII of 
21.12.2022 (shall enter into force ten calendar days after the date of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 61. Scientific and innovative-informative support of the rational use and 
protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal  
      Footnote. The title of the Article as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2). 
       1. The tasks of scientific support for the rational use and protection of water 
resources, water supply and wastewater disposal shall be:  
       1) foundation of an integrated and rational use of water resources;  
      2) assessment and forecast of development of the water sector; 
       3) development of scientific, methodological and technological grounds for water 
saving;  
       4) development of regulatory legal base for water management system;  
       5) working out of recommendations for taking management decisions.  
      2. (Is excluded) 
 
       3. Innovative activity in the field of use and protection of water resources, water 
supply and wastewater disposal shall be carried out in accordance with legislation of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan and shall be provided by:  
       1) formation of the organizational conditions;  
       2) the state support through implementation of investment projects, provided by 
the documents of the State planning system of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       4. For a long-term and medium-term planning of the integrated and rational use 
and protection of water resources, information support of water organization and water 
users, the authorized body together with the concerned government agencies may 
create a national information-analytical system for water resources’ use.  
       5. In order to create a database, individual and legal entities - water users provide 
the necessary information under the approved forms in the order, established by the 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      6. (Is excluded)  
      Footnote. Article 61, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); 
dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication).  
 


--- PAGE 56 ---

 Chapter 12. The rights and duties of individuals and work of public associations in use and protection 
of water resources  
Article 62. The rights and responsibilities of individuals in the use and protection 
of water resources  
       1. The individuals have the right to:  
       1) use water bodies, to take measures for their protection and rehabilitation in the 
order, specified by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       2) apply to the state agencies and organizations with inquiries, complaints and 
offers on use and protection of water bodies and require their consideration;  
       3) make suggestions on organization of a public environmental expertise of the 
use and protection of water resources and to take part in it;  
       4) demand abolition of decisions on placement, construction, reconstruction and 
commissioning of productions and other facilities, that do not meet the requirements 
for use and protection of water resources, as well as limitation or termination of 
business and other activities of individual and legal entities, affecting the water bodies 
in administrative or legal process;  
       5) exercise other rights, provided for by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
for use and protection of water resources.  
       2. The individuals are obliged to comply with the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan on use and protection of water resources and environmental protection.  
Article 63. Activities of public associations in use and protection of water 
resources  
       1. The activities of public associations for use and protection of water resources 
shall be carried out in accordance with their statutes and in the order, established by 
the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. Representatives of public associations may take part in the work of basin 
councils.  
       3. Public associations, at their own initiative, may conduct public control in use 
and protection of water resources.  
       4. The order of public control in use and protection of water resources shall be 
defined by the public associations in accordance with their statutes and in 
consultations with the authorized state bodies, involved in the state control over the 
use and protection of water resources.  
 Section 4. Water management  
 Chapter 13. The right to water use 
Article 64. Types of the rights for water use  
       1. For the circle of subjects there may be:  
       1) the right for general water use;  


--- PAGE 57 ---

       2) the right for special water use;  
       3) the right for solitary water use;  
      4) the right for joint water use. 
       2. For the grounds of origin there may be:  
       1) the right for primary water use;  
       2) the right for secondary water use.  
       3. For the time frames there are:  
       1) the right for permanent water use;  
       2) the right for temporary water use.  
       4. The right for general water use for a citizen arises from the moment of his birth 
and may not be alienated under any circumstances.  
       5. The right for special water use arises from the moment of receipt of a permit, 
issued in the order, established by this Code.  
      Footnote. Article 64, as revised by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
10.01.2011 No 383-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication.)  
 
Article 65. General water use  
       1. General water use shall be provided to meet the needs of the public without 
assignment of water bodies for certain individual or legal entities and without the use 
of facilities or technical devices, influencing the waters’ condition.  
       2. A special permit to provide the general water use is not required.  
       Individual and legal entities are not allowed to limit public access to water bodies 
of general water use via installation of barriers, security units, prohibition signs, 
except for the cases, provided by this Code.  
       3. General water use may be restricted or prohibited for environmental, technical 
and sanitary-epidemiological safety of the population.  
       4. The conditions and rules for common water use are established by the local 
representative bodies of oblasts cities of republican importance and the capital).  
      In order to protect the life and health of citizens, local representative bodies of 
oblasts (cities of republican importance and the capital), taking into account the 
specific features of regional conditions in the rules of general water use, may 
determine the places where bathing, water intake for drinking and household needs, 
watering stock, riding on small vessels and other floating facilities on water bodies 
located in the territory of the respective region are prohibited. 
      Footnote. Article 65, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); № 210-VI 


--- PAGE 58 ---

dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the expiration of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
 Article 66. Special water-use 
      1. Special water-use includes the use of surface and underground water resources 
directly from a water body with or without withdrawal to meet the drinking and 
economic needs of the population, the water needs of agriculture, industry, energy, 
fish farming and transport, as well as for the discharge of industrial, economic - 
domestic, drainage and other effluents using the following structures and technical 
devices: 
      1) stationary, mobile and floating structures for mechanical and gravity water 
intake from surface and sea waters; 
      2) drainage structures intended for discharge into surface and sea waters of 
industrial, household, collector-drainage, storm and other effluentss; 
      3) structures for the discharge of effluents into artificial water bodies intended for 
natural biological treatment of wastewater, and on the terrain; 
      4) dams and other water retaining and water regulating structures (including 
temporary blocking structures); 
      5) hydraulic power plants; 
      6) water facilities of thermal and nuclear power plants intended for water supply, 
effluents discharge, as well as for water cooling; 
      7) irrigation, watering, irrigation-watering and drainage systems; 
      8) water intake facilities equipped with pumping units and other water-lifting 
means for the extraction of groundwater and other purposes, including the production 
of drainage , water reduction and environmental protection measures that affect the 
state of groundwater; 
      9) spillway structures (wells, wells, mines) intended for the discharge of waste and 
other waters into the subsoil; 
      10) drainage structures of operated mine workings intended for extraction from 
mines, quarries, adits, open-pit mines; 
      11) self-flowing wells, mine wells, capturing springs and other small structures for 
the extraction of groundwater, operating without forced lowering of the water level; 
      12) absorption wells and wells for the discharge of industrial, household, drainage 
and other effluentss, technological solutions into underground aquifers and rock voids; 
      13) injection wells to maintain reservoir pressure during the development of 
hydrocarbons and underground leaching during the extraction of solid mineral 
deposits; 
      14) other technical devices affecting the state of waters. 


--- PAGE 59 ---

      2. Special use of water shall be carried out by individuals and legal entities on the 
basis of permission exclusively for the purposes specified in it and must not violate the 
rights and legitimate interests of other persons and cause environmental damage. 
      A permit for the use of drinking-quality groundwater for purposes not related to 
meeting the drinking needs of the population shall be issued in accordance with the 
requirements of paragraph 5 of Article 90 of this Code. 
      3. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated December 27, 
2017 № 126-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of six months after the day of 
its first official publication). 
 
      4. Permits for special water-use are not required for: 
      1) using the following intake structures: and the tubular shaft of filter wells, 
and also catchment structures, working without forced lowering with withdrawal of 
water in all cases, not more than fifty cubic meters per day from the surface of the 
first aquifer is not used for centralized water supply; 
      2) water intake by vessels from water bodies to ensure the operation of the vessel 
and its technological equipment; 
      3) the intake (pumping out) of underground waters (mine, quarry, mine), 
incidentally taken during the exploration and (or) extraction of solid minerals. 
      5. Permits for special water-use are issued by the basin inspectorates. 
      6. Permits are issued for the following types of special water-use: 
      1) discharge of groundwater (mine, quarry, mine), incidentally taken during the 
exploration and (or) extraction of solid minerals, industrial, household, drainage, 
waste and other waters into surface water bodies, subsoil, water facilities or terrain ; 
      2) the intake and (or) use of groundwater with the use of structures or technical 
devices specified in paragraph 1 of this article; 
      3) the intake and (or) use of surface water with the use of structures or technical 
devices specified in paragraph 1 of this article (hereinafter - the intake and (or) use of 
surface water). 
      7. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 10.07.2012 № 36-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication). 
 
      8. Permits for special water-use are issued to individuals or legal entities who 
have: 
      1) on the balance sheet corresponding to the established requirements and 
standards of structures or technical devices with the help of which special water-use is 
carried out; 


--- PAGE 60 ---

      2) water meters; 
      3) a list of secondary water-users with applications for the supply or reception of 
wastewater; 
      4) a sanitary and epidemiological conclusion on compliance with sanitary and 
epidemiological requirements for the intake of surface and (or) groundwater for 
domestic drinking water supply; 
      5) coordination of the conditions for water-use with the territorial divisions of the 
authorized body for the study of subsurface resources during the intake and (or) use of 
groundwater. No approval is required for the intake and (or) use of groundwater in a 
volume of up to fifty cubic meters per day, with the exception of mineral groundwater. 
      9. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated December 27, 
2017 № 126-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of six months after the day of 
its first official publication). 
 
      10. To obtain a permit for special water-use, the applicant submits the following 
documents to the basin inspectorates: 
      1) an application for the issue of a permit for special water-use in the 
form established by the authorized body; 
      2) a certificate of state registration (re-registration) of a legal entity; 
      3) a passport of a water management facility, irrigation and drainage systems or 
devices; 
      4) excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 28.10.2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); 
      5) excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 10.07.2012 № 36-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); 
 
      6) calculations of specific rates of water consumption and wastewater disposal, 
with the exception of individuals or legal entities carrying out the withdrawal of water 
resources 
for 
water 
treatment 
and 
( or ) delivery 
to water 
consumers for drinking needs , activities to regulate surface runoff using retaining 
hydraulic structures, the use of water bodies without withdrawal from them water 
resources, discharge of incidentally abstracted underground waters (mine, quarry, 
mine), which represent calculations to justify the volume of water consumption and 
water disposal; 


--- PAGE 61 ---

      7) a sanitary and epidemiological conclusion on compliance with sanitary and 
epidemiological requirements for the intake of surface and (or) groundwater for 
domestic and drinking water supply; 
      8) a list of secondary water-users with applications for the supply or reception of 
wastewater; 
      9) information on the availability of metering devices for water intake . 
      10-1. Basin inspectorates after receiving documents for issuing a permit for special 
water-use for the intake and (or) use of groundwater with withdrawal limits of fifty 
cubic meters per day, with the exception of mineral groundwater, within three working 
days send a request to the appropriate territorial subdivision of the authorized body for 
study of the subsoil to agree on the conditions for this water-use. 
      The territorial divisions of the authorized body for the study of subsoil within five 
working days are obliged to submit a positive or negative conclusion to the basin 
inspectorates. 
      In the absence of balance reserves of groundwater for wells drilled before June 29, 
2018, the approval is issued for a period of up to three years with the condition of 
conducting monitoring studies within the framework of the issued permit for special 
water-use in order to assess and examine groundwater reserves in the authorized body 
for the study of subsoil. 
      11. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated March 29, 
2016 № 479-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of twenty one calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
      12. To obtain a permit for special water-use related to the use of water bodies for 
hydropower purposes, in addition to the documents specified in paragraph 10 of this 
article, the following shall be submitted: 
      1) data on the installed capacity of the hydroelectric power plant; 
      2) information on the carrying capacity of power, waste and other structures; 
      3) information about fish protection and fish pass structures ; 
      4) excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated March 29, 2016 № 
479-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of twenty one calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication); 
 
      5) data on the indicators of the declared use of water resources for the needs of 
hydropower. 
      13. To obtain a permit for special water-use related to the use of surface water 
bodies without water withdrawal, in addition to the documents specified in paragraph 
10 of this article, the following shall be submitted: 


--- PAGE 62 ---

      1) technical characteristics of the vessel; 
      2) permission of the Register of Shipping for the operation of the vessel, indicating 
the port of its registration (place of registration); 
      3) data on the provision of coastal and swimming facilities for receiving the entire 
volume of wastewater, waste and waste generated on the ship; 
      4) information on the availability of means of control (observation) over the 
quality of water in the water area during the operation of facilities and the production 
of work that have or may have a negative impact on the state of the water body and the 
environment. 
      14. A permit for special water-use is issued by the basin inspectorates no later than 
ten working days from the date of submission of the application with all the necessary 
documents submitted by the applicant in accordance with this Code. 
      14-1. The validity period of a permit for special water-use is determined in 
accordance with Article 70 of this Code. 
      15. Changing the name of a legal entity and (or) changing its location, changing 
the last name, first name, patronymic (if any) of an individual, re-registration of an 
individual entrepreneur require re-issuing a permit for special water-use on the basis 
of a written application from an individual or legal entity. 
      An application to the basin inspectorate is sent within thirty calendar days from the 
date of the changes that occurred with the attachment of supporting documents on 
changing the name of a legal entity and (or) changing its location, changing the last 
name, first name, patronymic (if any) of an individual, re-registration of an individual 
entrepreneur. 
      Upon renewal of a permit for special water-use, its number, conditions and validity 
period remain unchanged. In the upper right corner of the permit document, the mark 
"Reissued" is made. 
      Changing the conditions for special water-use requires obtaining a new permit for 
special water-use. 
      Re-issuance of a permit for special water-use is carried out by basin inspectorates 
no later than three working days from the date of submission of an application with all 
the necessary documents submitted by the applicant in accordance with this Code. 
      15-1. If the conditions for water-use remain unchanged, the validity period of the 
permit for special water-use may be extended on the basis of a written application 
from an individual or legal entity. 
      The extension of the permit for special water-use is carried out by the basin 
inspectorates no later than three working days from the date of submission of the 


--- PAGE 63 ---

application with all the necessary documents submitted by the applicant in accordance 
with this Code. 
      16. The Basin Inspectorate, which issued a permit for special water-use, suspends 
its validity in the manner prescribed by the laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan, in the 
following cases: 
      1) establishing the inaccuracy of the information provided for obtaining a permit 
for special water-use; 
      2) revealing violations of the requirements of water and environmental legislation 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan; 
      3) restrictions on the right to water-use, provided for in Article 74 of this Code. 
      If the facts specified in subparagraphs 1) and 2) of the first part of this paragraph 
are revealed during the verification, the basin inspectorate issues an order to eliminate 
them, indicating the time frame. After the expiration of the established period, the 
basin inspectorate conducts a second check to determine whether the violation has 
been eliminated. 
      In case of failure to comply with the order within the specified time period, the 
basin inspectorate, within ten working days from the date of the repeated inspection, 
sends a notice of suspension of the permit for special water-use, indicating the reason 
and period of suspension. 
      In case of suspension of the permit for special water-use on the basis of 
subparagraph 3) of the first part of this paragraph, the basin inspection is limited only 
to notifying an individual or legal entity indicating the reason for the suspension of the 
permit. 
      Footnote. Article 66 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 10.01.2011 No 383-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication); as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 10.07.2012 No 36-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication); dated 24.12.2012 No 60-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of 
ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 04.07.2013 No 132-V (shall 
be enforced from 01.01.2014); dated 16.05.2014 № 203-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of six months after its first official publication); dated 07.11.2014 № 248-V 
(shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); 
dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication); dated 29.03.2016 № 479-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of twenty one calendar days after its first official publication); № 126-VI of 
27.12.2017 (shall be enforced upon  six months after the day of its first official 
publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 


--- PAGE 64 ---

calendar days after the day of its first official publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-
VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 67. Solitary water use  
       1. The right to solitary water use arises during provision of water bodies or their 
parts to one individual or legal entity for use.  
      2. At the water bodies provided for separate water use, the general water use is 
allowed on the conditions established by local representative bodies of oblasts (cities 
of republican significance, the capital). 
      3. The water user carrying out the separate water use shall be obliged in the order 
established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan to announce the 
conditions or prohibition of the general water use, unless otherwise is established by 
the decisions of local representative bodies of oblasts (cities of republican importance, 
the capital). 
      Footnote. Article 67 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; № 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the expiration 
of ten calendar days after the date of its first official publication). 
 
Article 68. Joint water use  
       1. The right of joint water use arises during provision of water bodies or their 
parts to several individuals and (or) legal entities for use.  
       2. Under the joint water use, the interests of water users, involved in drinking 
water supply of the population are met first, as well as the interests of the downstream 
water users.  
      3. At the water bodies provided for joint water use, the general water use is 
allowed on the conditions established by local representative bodies of oblasts (cities 
of republican significance, the capital). 
      4. Water users conducting joint water use shall be obliged to announce conditions 
or prohibition of joint water use, unless otherwise established by decisions of local 
representative bodies of oblasts (cities of republican significance, the capital). 
      Footnote. Article 68 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12. 2004 No 13; № 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the expiration 
of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 69. Primary and secondary water use  
      1. Primary water use shall be the water consumption by individual and legal 
entities, carrying out water intake directly from the water bodies to meet their own 
needs and (or) supply it to the secondary water users. 


--- PAGE 65 ---

      2. Secondary water use shall be the water consumption by individual and legal 
entities, who receive water from other water users on the basis of a contract. 
      3. The contract for secondary water use specifies the purpose for the water use, 
and the basic conditions for its use with regard of volumes, specified in the permits for 
special water use. 
      The contract for secondary water use must contain requirements for the secondary 
water user on carrying out payment for water resources use. 
      Footnote. Article 69 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after 
its first official publication). 
 
Article 70. Timeframes for water use  
       1. Water bodies shall be provided for regular or temporary water use.  
       2. Regular water use is the water consumption without the time limits.  
       3. Temporary water use may be short-term - up to five years and long-term – from 
five to forty-nine years.  
      4. If necessary, the time frames for water use may be extended. 
       5. The time limits for a special water use depend on the resource potential and 
current ecological status of the water body.  
       6. General water use is regular.  
Article 71. The rights of water users  
      Water users are entitled to: 
       1) use water bodies for the purposes, they are provided for, with observance of the 
conditions and requirements, provided by the water legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan;  
       2) provide their right to use water objects at their discretion, while not violating 
the rights and legitimate interests of other persons, causing harm to water bodies and 
environmental damage;  
       3) use the lands of the water reserves in the order, established by the legislation of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       4) establish associations, unions (associations) and other non-profit organizations 
of water users;  
       5) receive data on the water bodies’ condition for water management in the order, 
established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       6) check quality and quantity of the supplied water;  
       7) protect their rights to water use;  
       8) receive compensation for damage, caused by violation of rights, including the 
rights to water in accordance with the established limit and the supply regime;  


--- PAGE 66 ---

       9) exercise other rights, provided by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan on 
use and protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal.  
      Footnote. Article 71, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-
VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 72. Responsibilities of water users  
       Water users shall:  
       1) use water resources rationally, take measures to reduce water losses;  
       2) take care of the water bodies and water facilities to prevent their harm;  
       3) comply with the established limits, allowed volumes and water use conditions;  
       4) not violate the rights and interests of other water users and users of natural 
resources;  
       5) keep water facilities and technical equipment in good working condition, 
influencing the water condition, improve their performance, and keep record of the 
water use, provide measurement and water metering devices to the intakes, outfalls 
and water facilities and discharging facilities for waste and drainage waters;  
       6) take water protection measures;  
      7) carry out the conditions of water use timely and fully, defined by a permit for a 
special water use and or by a contract for secondary water use, as well as prescriptions 
of regulatory bodies; 
      8) prevent the discharge of harmful substances exceeding the established 
standards, with the exception of pollutants coming from the elimination of emergency 
oil spills; 
       9) provide accurate and complete information on water use to the authorized 
bodies, in the form, prescribed by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       10) take measures to introduce water-saving technologies, advanced irrigation 
techniques, recycling and re-use water supply systems;  
       11) prevent pollution of the intake area of surface and underground waters;  
       12) ensure compliance with the established mode of economic and other activities 
at the protection zones of the water bodies;  
      13) prevent the use of drinking-quality groundwater for purposes not related to 
drinking water supply, unless otherwise provided by this Code; 
       14) comply with the requirements, established by the legislation of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan on civil safety at the water facilities and water management facilities;  
       15) ensure safety of individuals at the water bodies and water facilities;  
       16) inform immediately the territorial bodies of the authorized body in the field of 
civil safety and local executive agencies of regions (city of republican significance, the 


--- PAGE 67 ---

capital) about all the emergency situations and violations of technology regime of 
water use, as well as to take measures to prevent damage of water bodies;  
       17) make timely payments for the water use;  
       17-1) obtain an environmental permit for emissions into the environment in 
accordance with the Environmental Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       18) perform other duties, provided by the Law s of the Republic of Kazakhstan for 
use and protection of water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal.  
      Footnote. Article 72, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 09.01.2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 12.01.2007 No 222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of 6 months after the date of 
its official publication); dated 26.05.2008 No 34-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 
2); dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 
11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of 
sixty calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 73. Protection of the rights of water users  
       1. The right to water use is protected by the Law. No one shall be deprived of the 
rights for water use, except for the grounds, defined in this Code and other Law s of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
       2. Interference of the state bodies into the work of water users, associated with the 
impairment of their right to water use, shall be prohibited, except for the cases, 
provided by this Code.  
Article 74. Restriction of the rights for water use  
       1. The right to water use may be limited in the order, established by the Laws of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan, in order to ensure security and defense of the state, public 
health, environment, historical and cultural heritage, rights and legal interests of other 
persons, as well as in lack of water, emergency situations of natural and man-made 
origin.  
      2. Restriction of the right to water use should not worsen the conditions for the use 
of water resources for drinking and economic needs of the population. 
      Footnote. Article 74 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication).  
 
Article 75. Termination of the right for a special water use 


--- PAGE 68 ---

      1. The right to a special water use shall be terminated in the following cases: 
       1) a water user’s waiver of the right for water use;  
       2) expiry of time-limit for water use;  
      3) death of an individual - water user; 
       4) liquidation of a legal entity - water user;  
      5) natural or artificial disappearance of water bodies; 
      6) transfer of the right to use water bodies to other individual and legal entities in 
the order, prescribed by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      In the event of the occurrence of grounds for the termination of the right to special 
water-use, provided for in subparagraphs 1), 2), 5) and 6) of the first part of this 
paragraph, the basin inspectorate sends a written notice to an individual or legal entity 
about the termination of the permit for special water-use. 
      2. The right to a special water use shall be terminated by revocation of a permit for 
a special water use in the following cases: 
      1) non-use during a year of water resources intended for drinking water supply; 
      2) non-use of water resources for three years; 
      3) arising of the need to use water resources for the state requirements; 
      4) non-elimination of violations that were grounds for suspension of a permit for 
special water use. 
      3. Grounds for revocation of a permit for a special water use, provided by 
subparagraphs 1) and 2), of paragraph 2 of this Article shall be revealed during a state 
inspection of the use and protection of water resources. 
      Revocation of a permit for a special water use shall be carried out in accordance 
with the Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Administrative infractions. 
      4. Decision on termination of the right to a special water use shall be the ground 
for termination of a water use contract. 
      Footnote. Article 75 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 16.05.2014 № 203-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after its first 
official publication); as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
29.12.2014 № 269-V (shall be enforced from 01.01.2015); dated October 28, 2019 № 
268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first 
official publication). 
 
Article 76. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 12.01.2007 No 
222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of six months after the date of its official 
publication.)  
 Section 5. Organization of water management 
Chapter 14. Water supply organizations  


--- PAGE 69 ---

Article 77. The state water supply organizations  
       The state water supply organizations shall be established by the Government of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan to fulfill the following activities:  
      1) the state monitoring of water bodies; 
       2) drawing up of the state water cadaster;  
       3) development and improvement of monitoring of the water bodies’ condition;  
       4) development and improvement of water use technology and upgrading of its 
efficiency in various economic sectors;  
       5) development of water management regulations;  
       6) maintenance, operation and safety of water systems and facilities, that are in 
the republican property;  
       7) timely and uninterrupted water supply to water users from cross-border, inter-
state, inter-regional water bodies and water facilities, that are in the republican 
property;  
       8) equity participation in reparation of the interstate water bodies with the 
neighboring states.  
      Footnote. Article 77, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
Article 78. Public water supply organizations  
       Public water supply organizations shall be established by local executive bodies 
of oblasts (city of republican status, the capital) in order to conduct the following 
activities:  
       1) maintenance, operation, and security of water supply facilities, that are in 
public property;  
       2) timely and uninterrupted water supply to water users from water bodies;  
       3) collection, treatment and discharge of the used, sewage and drainage waters.  
      Footnote. Article 78, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
Article 79. Non-state water supply organizations  
       1. Non-state water supply organizations shall be established by individual and 
legal entities, including by the foreign ones, to provide water supply services, 
maintenance of water facilities and entrepreneurial activity in use and protection of 
water resources, water supply and wastewater disposal.  
       2. Business activity in use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal shall be carried out in the following directions:  
       1) intake of water resources for use;  


--- PAGE 70 ---

       2) intake of water resources for water conditioning and purification and (or) its 
supply to water users, and (or) to water consumers;  
      3) collection, treatment and discharge of the used, wastewater and drainage waters; 
       4) use of water bodies without water intake;  
       5) improvement of water quality and water facilities’ condition;  
      6) provision of services in water and environmental marketing; 
       7) and other directions in compliance with the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan.  
      3. The state support to entrepreneurship in use and protection of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal is carried out in accordance with the legislation 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 79, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
Article 80. Requirements to the water supply organizations  
       1. Water supply organizations are the natural monopolies, conducting their 
activities in accordance with this Code, the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
the statutes of the organization and the agreements of the parties.  
       2. Water supply organizations shall:  
       1) ensure proper technical condition of water supply systems and facilities, as well 
as their safety;  
       2) provide water users with water according to the contract within the timeframes;  
       3) in consultation with water users to install water metering devices at the delivery 
points;  
       4) take measures to prevent pollution, contamination and depletion of water 
bodies and harmful effects of waters;  
       5) have a passport of the irrigation and drainage systems, the water management 
facility.  
      Footnote. Article 80, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
 Chapter 15. State standardization in use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of Chapter 15, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2).  
Article 81. Standardization in use and protection of water resources, water 
supply and wastewater disposal  


--- PAGE 71 ---

      Footnote. The title of Article 81, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2). 
       1. A uniform system of normative-technical, sanitary-epidemiological and 
metrological support in the use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal shall be established in order to regulate the requirements to 
quantity and quality of waters, standards of measurement accuracy of their indexes 
and the limits of influence of production and other activities on the water bodies.  
       2. Standardization in use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal shall be carried out by the authorized body and other state bodies 
within their competence.  
      Footnote. Article 81, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
Article 82. Limits of water use 
      1. Limits of water use in the context of basins and regions, cities of republican 
significance, the capital shall be set for a ten-year period in accordance with basin 
schemes and shall be approved by the authorized body. 
      2. On the basis of water-use limits established in accordance with paragraph 1 
of this article, basin inspectorates establish water-use limits in the context of regions, 
cities of republican significance, the capital, districts and primary water-users, taking 
into account the forecast of water content of the current year, ecological and sanitary 
and epidemiological state of water bodies, as well as the level of socio-economic 
development of the regions. 
      The annual formation of water needs shall be carried out at the request of primary 
water users, based on calculations to justify the volume of water consumption and 
water discharge of secondary water users. The volumes of water supply for secondary 
water users shall be determined under the contracts for secondary water use, taking 
into account established water use limits. 
      3. For the purpose of operative regulation of water-use in dry years, the basin 
inspectorate takes measures to limit or suspend water intake from a water body by 
sending an official notification to primary water-users. Priority after drinking water 
supply and environmental releases are industrial enterprises, designed for guaranteed 
supply in dry years, irrigated agriculture, designed for guaranteed supply in medium-
 water years , and estuary irrigation, designed for guaranteed supply in an average 
water content year. 
      After adoption of operational regulatory measures, the water use limit shall be 
subject to adjustment. 


--- PAGE 72 ---

      Footnote. Article 82 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after 
its first official publication); amended law s RK of 28.10.2019 number 268 VI- (put 
into effect after ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 83. Normative-technical, sanitary-epidemiological and metrological 
support of water control and recording  
       1. The system of normative-technical, sanitary and epidemiological and 
metrological control and water metering includes the national standards, sanitary and 
epidemiological regulations and norms and other regulatory legal acts of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan.  
       2. The requirements of normative-technical, sanitary and epidemiological and 
metrological control and water measurement shall be developed in accordance with 
the international treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      3. The requirements of normative-technical regulations, sanitary and 
epidemiological and metrological control and water measurement shall be developed, 
agreed and approved in the order, prescribed by the authorized body. 
      Footnote. Article 83, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
10.07.2012 No 31-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication.); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 84. Maximal emission limits for adverse impacts on water bodies  
      1. Maintenance of surface and underground waters in a state that meets 
environmental and sanitary and epidemiological requirements is ensured by 
compliance with the standards for maximum permissible harmful effects on water 
bodies established by the department of the authorized body in agreement with the 
authorized state body in the field of environmental protection, the authorized body for 
the study of subsoil , a state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological well-
being of the population and an authorized body in the field of civil protection. 
       2. The standards of maximum permissible adverse impacts on water bodies shall 
be established on the basis of:  
       1) the maximum permissible volume of anthropogenic load, the long-lasting effect 
of which would not change the ecological system of the water body;  
       2) the maximum permissible weight and concentration of harmful substances that 
may enter the water body and its catchment area.  


--- PAGE 73 ---

      3. The procedure for development and approval of the standards for maximum 
permissible adverse impacts on water bodies shall be established by the authorized 
body. 
      Footnote. Article 84 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 85. Standardization and validation of compliance in the use and 
protection of water fund, water supply and sanitation 
      1. National standards for the use and protection of water resources, water supply 
and sanitation shall be developed and approved in accordance with the procedure 
established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan in the field of 
standardization. 
      2. Confirmation of compliance with the requirements of national and interstate 
standards with respect to individual domestic and group technical means of water 
treatment and decontamination, as well as materials, reagents, technological processes, 
equipment and other means used in drinking water supply systems shall be carried out 
in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan in the field of 
technical regulation. 
      Footnote. Article 85 in the wording of the Law of the RK dated 30.12.2020 № 
397-VI (shall enter into force upon the expiry of the calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication). 
 
Article 86. Requirements for reduction of water intake volumes and water use  
       1. The requirements for reduction of water intake volumes and water use from 
water bodies shall be achieved via revising of the water consumption standards for 
various technological processes and specific water consumption standards in all 
sectors of economy.  
       2. The requirements for reduction of water intake volumes and water use shall be 
achieved by:  
       1) reduction of losses and leak offs in all transporting, distributing networks and at 
each water consumption point;  
       2) water saving due to introduction of efficient methods and technologies of water 
use and total water metering.  


--- PAGE 74 ---

      3. The state bodies, local executive bodies of regions, city of republican 
significance, capital and water users shall be obliged to analyze annually recording of 
water discharge, water losses in transportation networks, water consumption points 
and the possibility of reducing the water intake volumes from water bodies. 
      The authorized body at least once every five years develop and approve the 
integrated water consumption and water discharge standards for certain sectors of the 
economy. Integrated water consumption and water discharge standards shall be taken 
into account when developing schemes for the integrated use and protection of water 
resources and documents of the State planning system. 
      Water users, on the basis of integrated water consumption and water discharge 
standards, at least once every five years develop specific water consumption and water 
discharge standards in accordance with the methodology approved by the authorized 
body. 
      Specific norms of water consumption and water discharge shall be considered in 
calculating upon objection of volumes for water consumption and water discharge. 
      Footnote. Article 86 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty 
calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 87. Requirements to improvement of the drinking water quality  
      The department of the authorized body, together with other interested state bodies, 
develops requirements for improving the quality of drinking water, which include: 
       1) maintenance in a good working condition of technology and capacity of 
facilities, meeting the certain quality of a water body;  
       2) reduction of faults of the water supply and wastewater systems;  
       3) appliance of reliable equipment and materials with high-quality construction 
works;  
       4) periodic improvement of standards and national standards of the potable water.  
      Footnote. Article 87, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 10.07.2012 No 31-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 88. Prohibition of commissioning of facilities, negatively affecting the 
status of water bodies  
       1. The following facilities shall not be permitted to commission:  


--- PAGE 75 ---

       1) the new and reconstructed facilities that are not provided with the equipment 
and devices, able to prevent the harmful effects, water pollution and contamination, as 
well as those, not equipped with water and wastewater discharge metering devices;  
       2) water-intake and wastewater disposal facilities without fish protection devices;  
       3) cattle farms and other production complexes, that do not have water and 
wastewater treatment facilities and sanitary protection zones;  
       4) irrigation, watering and drainage systems, reservoirs, dams, canals and other 
waterworks prior to the actions, planned under the project to prevent flooding, 
underflooding, water logging and salinization and soil erosion;  
       5) water intake facilities, related to the underground water use, that are not 
provided with water regulating equipment and measuring devices;  
      6) water intakes and other hydro-technical facilities, not provided with sanitary 
protection zones and observation stations to record indicators of water bodies’ and 
water facilities’ condition; 
       7) facilities and devices for transportation and storage of oil, chemical and other 
products, not equipped with special devices for water pollution prevention.  
       2. Commissioning of wastewater irrigation systems shall not be allowed without 
establishment of observation stations to record the indicators of water bodies’ 
condition.  
       3. Commissioning of water facilities is not permitted without completion of land 
reclamation works and water reservoirs - without preparation of a bed for flooding.  
       4. A decision to ban commissioning of enterprises and other facilities, influencing 
the water bodies’ condition, shall be taken in the order, established by the legislation 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 89. The use of surface water bodies for wastewater discharge  
       1. The use of surface water bodies for wastewater discharge shall be prohibited, 
except for the cases, provided for in paragraph 2 of this Article.  
      2. Discharge of wastewater into surface water bodies is allowed if there is a permit 
for special water-use with the condition of their purification to the limits established 
by the authorized state body in the field of environmental protection and the state body 
in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population . 
       3. The organizations, that have ponds for industrial contaminated wastewater, 
mine, or wastewaters shall be obliged to take the necessary measures to clean, treat 
and recycle them, as well as to reclaim the lands, occupied by these ponds.  
      Footnote. Article 89, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
10.07.2012 No 36-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication.); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 


--- PAGE 76 ---

calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
 The special part  
 Section 6. The use of water bodies and water facilities  
 Chapter 16. Drinking, technical water supply and water discharge of settlements 
      Footnote. Title of the Chapter 16 is in the wording of the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication). 
Article 90. Use of water facilities and water facilities for drinking water supply 
      Footnote. Title of the Article 90 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication). 
      1. The surface and underground waters and water facilities, protected from 
pollution and contamination, the water quality of which meets the national and 
hygiene standards are available for drinking water supply. 
       2. In order to provide the population with the drinking water, in case of 
emergency situations of natural and man-made origin, reservation of drinking water 
sources shall be carried out on the basis of the underground water bodies protected 
from pollution and contamination. At the reserved water supply sources, a special 
regime for water protection and control over their condition is established in 
accordance with the water and other legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      3. The safety of surface and underground waters for drinking water supply is 
determined by the state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of 
the population.  
      4. The classification of a water body as a source of drinking water supply is carried 
out taking into account its reliability and the possibility of organizing sanitary 
protection zones in the manner established by the state body in the field of sanitary 
and epidemiological welfare of the population.  
      5. The use of groundwater suitable for drinking water supply for other purposes is 
not allowed, except in the absence of other sources of water supply and when these 
groundwaters are not an uncontested source of drinking water supply. 
      6. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated October 28, 2019 № 
268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first 
official publication). 
 
       7. Water supply to the districts of a city, district towns, settlements, villages, rural 
districts shall be arranged by the heads of these territories.  


--- PAGE 77 ---

      State control over the quality of drinking water in urban and rural settlements is 
carried out by the territorial subdivision of the state body in the field of sanitary and 
epidemiological welfare of the population .  
      Footnote. Article 90, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 10.07.2012 No 31-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication.); by the Constitutional Law of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 03.07.2013 No 121-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V 
(shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); 
dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication); dated 29.10.2015 № 376-V (shall be enforced from 
01.01.2016); dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty 
calendar days after its first official publication); № 126-VI dated 27.12.2017 (shall be 
enforced upon the expiration of six months after the day of its first official 
publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 91. Centralized drinking water supply of the population  
      Footnote. Title of Article91 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication). 
       1. Centralized drinking water supply of the population shall be carried out by legal 
entities that having the appropriate water pipeline network.  
      2. Legal entities carrying out centralized drinking water supply are obliged to 
organize accounting of the withdrawn water, conduct regular monitoring of the 
condition of water in sources and water supply systems, immediately report to local 
representative and executive bodies of the region (city of republican significance, the 
capital), the department of the authorized body, state body in the field of sanitary and 
epidemiological well-being of the population, an authorized state body in the field of 
environmental protection, an authorized body for the study of subsoil on the deviation 
of water quality in sources and water supply systems from established national 
standards and hygienic standards. 
      Footnote. Article 91, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 10.07.2012 No 31-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication.); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 


--- PAGE 78 ---

publication). 
 
Article 92. Non-centralized drinking water supply of the population 
      Footnote. Title of Article 92 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication). 
      1. With decentralized drinking water supply to the population, individuals and 
legal entities have the right to take water directly from surface and ground water 
bodies in the presence of a positive conclusion of the state body in the field of sanitary 
and epidemiological well-being of the population as a whole on these water bodies 
with mandatory registration of water-use by local executive bodies of regions, cities of 
republican significance, the capital in the manner prescribed by the authorized body.   
      Individuals carrying out non-centralized drinking water supply for own needs, 
shall carry out registration on a voluntary basis. 
      Non-centralized drinking water supply of the population shall not require a permit 
for a special water use during the water intake from water facilities in the amount of 
up to fifty cubic meters per day. 
      2. The intake of water from surface and ground water bodies with decentralized 
drinking water supply of the population is carried out in accordance with the 
rules approved by the local representative bodies of the region (city of republican 
significance, the capital), on the proposal of local executive bodies of the region (city 
of republican significance, the capital), as agreed with basin inspectorates and a state 
body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population. 
      Footnote. Article 92, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.01.2007 No 222 (shall be enforced upon expiry of six 
months from the date of its official publication.); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be 
enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after its 
first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-1. The composition of water supply and water discharge systems of 
settlements  
      1. Water supply and water discharge systems of settlements are classified among 
the facilities of life support of settlements. 
      2. The constituent elements of the water supply system of the settlement shall be: 
      1) water intake facilities; 
      2) water treatment facilities; 


--- PAGE 79 ---

      3) regulatory capacity; 
      4) pumping stations; 
      5) local waterways; 
      6) distribution networks; 
      7) inlet to buildings; 
      8) internal water supply systems; 
      9) water metering units. 
      3. The constituent elements of water discharge system of settlement shall be: 
      1) building internal water discharge systems; 
      2) releases from buildings; 
      3) intra and street networks; 
      4) collectors; 
      5) pumping stations; 
      6) wastewater treatment facilities complexes; 
      7) facilities for the disposal of treated wastewater into water facilities (water 
disposal). 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-1 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-2. The drinking water supply systems of settlements 
      1. The drinking water supply systems of settlements shall be divided into 
centralized, non-centralized, differing in the type of water supply source and the 
composition of the elements included in the system. 
      2. Centralized water supply system shall be a complex of engineering networks 
and facilities intended for intake, preparation, storage, transportation and drinking 
water supply to water consumers. 
      3. Non-centralized water supply system shall be water intake and water treatment 
facilities intended for the intake and preparation of drinking water, without 
transporting it through pipelines. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-2 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-3. Technical water supply systems 
      1. Technical water supply systems shall be created for providing water of 
production needs of individual entrepreneurs and legal entities according to the 
established standards of technological process. 


--- PAGE 80 ---

      2. The water reuse, recycling water supply shall be provided upon choosing a 
technical water supply scheme. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-3 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-4. The water discharge systems of settlements 
       1. The water discharge systems of settlements serve for joint and (or) separate 
uninterrupted discharge of wastewater.  
      2. The conditions and procedure for waste water collection in the water discharge 
system of settlements shall be determined in accordance with the rules for the 
reception of wastewater in the water discharge system of settlements. 
      3. Liquid household waste from residential buildings (residential buildings) that 
are not connected to the drainage system of the settlement should be discharged into 
watertight cesspools with subsequent removal by special vehicles and drainage at 
drainage stations, the locations of which are determined by the territorial divisions of 
the state body in the field of sanitary - the epidemiological well-being of the 
population, the territorial body of the authorized state body in the field of 
environmental protection and the organization for water supply and (or) wastewater 
disposal.  
      4. Waste water collection of individual entrepreneurs and legal entities into the 
water discharge systems of settlements shall be allowed upon condition: 
      1) compliance of wastewater with the requirements for the content in them of the 
permissible concentration of harmful substances in accordance with the rules for waste 
water collection into water discharge system of settlements. In case of non-compliance 
of wastewater, individual entrepreneurs and legal entities shall be obliged to carry out 
their treatment at their local water discharge treatment facilities; 
      2) meeting the requirements of the technical conditions of the organization for 
water supply and (or) water discharge. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-4 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-5. Guarantees for providing the drinking water supply to the 
population and domestic wastewater discharge  
      1. Individuals on the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be provided 
with drinking water in accordance with the established standards of water 


--- PAGE 81 ---

consumption domestic wastewater discharge in availability of attached water supply 
and (or) water discharge networks. 
       2. The owner of water supply and water discharge systems of settlements shall be 
a guarantor for providing drinking water to the population and domestic wastewater 
discharge.  
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-5 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-6. Ensuring drinking water quality 
      The quality of drinking water shall be ensured by: 
      1) selection of the source of drinking water supply; 
      2) using it for the preparation of drinking water of relevant technology, equipment, 
materials, reagents, having documents confirming the safety in their use and 
compliance with the established requirements of sanitary rules, hygienic standards and 
technical regulations; 
      3) implementation of measures to restore drinking water supply; 
      4) qualified technical operation of water supply systems of settlements; 
      5) conducting quality control of water in drinking water supply sources and 
systems for compliance with sanitary rules and hygienic standards. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-6 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-7. General provisions for water metering of water supply and water 
discharge of settlements  
      1. In water supply systems a complete metering of the water volumes, taken from 
sources, supplied into the distribution network and to water consumers shall be 
organized. 
      2. The water metering shall be obligatory: 
      1) at pumping stations of the first, second, third and subsequent rises; 
      2) at parting borders of the balance sheet membership or operational responsibility 
with the water supply systems of the water user; 
      3) in multi-dwelling houses (residential buildings) by means of a general house 
water metering device. 
      3. Requirements for water metering devices shall be established by this Code, 
technical regulations, rules for selection, installation and operation of water metering 
devices in water supply and water discharge systems. 


--- PAGE 82 ---

      4. Settlements with water consumers for discharged water shall be carried out on 
the basis of contracts, taking into account the readings of water metering devices 
installed at the water consumer and approved for operation as commercial. 
      5. The volume of provided water supply services and (or) water discharge shall be 
determined according to the method of calculating the volume of provided water 
supply services and (or) water discharge of settlements, approved by the authorized 
body for public utilities. 
      6. Organizations for water supply and (or) water discharge annually, on the basis 
of water metering data, shall analyze water losses in distribution networks and at water 
consumer. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-7 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-8. Organizations of commercial water metering  
      1. Compulsory installation of general household and individual (apartment) water 
metering devices to organize commercial water metering shall be provided in the 
projects for construction, reconstruction, technical re-equipment, modernization, and 
overhaul repair of multi-family dwelling houses (residential buildings). 
      2. In newly commissioned facilities, shall be provided installation of water 
metering devices, having a high metrological class with a low sensitivity threshold 
with remote data transmission. This requirement also applies in the case of 
replacement of inoperative or spent fixed life of common house water metering 
devices. 
      3. When replacing inoperative or spent fixed life of individual (apartment) water 
metering devices, shall be provided installation of water metering devices, having a 
high metrological class with a low sensitivity threshold, equipped with devices for the 
possibility of subsequent remote data transmission. 
      4. Acceptance for operation a facility connected to water supply and (or) water 
discharge networks of the settlement, without water metering devices shall not be 
allowed. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-8 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-9. Rights and obligations of water users 
      1. Water consumers, using water supply and (or) water discharge services in 
settlements shall have the right to: 


--- PAGE 83 ---

      1) uninterrupted supply of water from drinking water supply systems in 
accordance with sanitary rules for drinking water consumption in accordance with the 
concluded agreement; 
      2) receipt of a payment document for payment for the provided water supply and 
(or) water discharge services; 
      3) obtaining information on the quality of drinking water and possible 
interruptions in its supply; 
      4) filing a lawsuit in court; 
      5) participation in public hearings held to discuss the draft tariffs for water supply 
and (or) water discharge; 
      6) termination of the contract unilaterally, subject to written notification to the 
organization for water supply and (or) water discharge not later than one month; 
      7) provision of drinking water as a matter of priority from the drinking water 
supply systems, if their objects are related to the housing stock, shall used by health 
care entities, as well as for the production of food products; 
      8) appeal to the organization for water supply and (or) water discharge to adjust 
payment for the provided services; 
      9) other the rights provided for by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      2. Water consumers using water supply and (or) water discharge services in 
settlements shall be obliged to: 
      1) conclude a contract for water supply and (or) water discharge with the 
organization for water supply and (or) water discharge; 
      2) maintain safety and proper sanitary and technical condition of its own water 
supply and water discharge systems, control units thereto, water metering devices in 
accordance with the established requirements; 
      3) pay for water supply and (or) water disposal services timely and in full in 
accordance with the concluded agreement and established tariffs; 
      4) have technical conditions for connection to water supply and water discharge 
systems, executive survey of own water supply networks and (or) water discharge, 
including water consumers living in private house building, with the exception of 
water consumers living in multi-family dwelling houses (residential buildings); 
      5) observe the rules for using water supply and water discharge systems, sanitary 
rules, as well as comply with the requirements established by the water legislation of 
the Republic of Kazakhstan; 
      6) prevent discharge of wastewater with contaminants exceeding the permissible 
concentrations of harmful substances; 


--- PAGE 84 ---

      7) prevent discharge of storm and drainage water into the water discharge system 
of household waste water; 
      8) not connect other water consumers to their own water supply and (or) water 
discharge networks without permission of the organization for water supply and (or) 
water discharge; 
      9) comply with the technical requirements of the organization for water supply and 
(or) water discharge; 
      10) fulfill other requirements established by the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 
      3. Water consumers - legal entities, in addition to the duties provided by paragraph 
2 of this Article, shall be obliged to: 
      1) ensure unimpeded access of representatives of the organization for water supply 
and (or) water discharge to water metering devices for taking testimony and 
performance testing, monitoring the technical condition and safety of all elements of 
water supply and water discharge systems located on the territory or under economic 
jurisdiction for sampling waters, as well as to disconnect networks of water consumers 
having debt; 
      2) request technical conditions or technical requirements of the organization for 
water supply and (or) water discharge upon increasing volumes in water consumption 
and (or) water discharge in excess of the established in the contract. 
       Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-9 in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
Article 92-10. Rights and obligations of the organization for water supply and 
(or) water discharge 
      1. The organization for water supply and (or) water discharge shall have the right 
to: 
      1) charge for the provided water supply and (or) water discharge services in the 
manner established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan; 
      2) check the water metering devices; 
      3) sue in court; 
      4) have other the rights provided by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      2. The organization for water supply and (or) water discharge shall be obliged to: 
      1) ensure the preparation of drinking water and its supply to water consumers in 
accordance with hygienic standards; 
      2) ensure the uninterrupted provision of water supply and (or) water discharge 
services in settlements; 


--- PAGE 85 ---

      3) provide accounting of water intake from sources, its supply to the network and 
water consumers; 
      4) observe the regime of economic and other activities established for the zones of 
sanitary protection of sources, sanitary protection lines of pipelines of water supply 
systems and sanitary protection zones of elements of water discharge systems; 
      5) to ensure the proper operation of water supply and water discharge systems; 
      6) issue a permit for connecting water consumer facilities to the water supply and 
water discharge systems subject to the condition of the water consumer’s networks 
and facilities and (or) compliance with the technical conditions of the water supply 
and (or) water discharge organization; 
      7) fulfill other requirements established by the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-10 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-11. Water supply and discharge systems included in housing 
condominiums 
      1. The structure of housing condominiums include: 
      1) for water supply - internal water supply systems within the boundaries of the 
external walls of dwelling houses (residential buildings), including group installations 
for additional purification of drinking water, pumping the pump installations; 
      2) for water discharge - in-house systems, including releases to the first well in the 
place of connection to water discharge network of the settlement. 
      2. The operation of the internal water supply and water discharge systems of 
dwelling houses (residential buildings) is carried out by the owners of apartments and 
premises, the management body of the condominium object, and on a contractual 
basis. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-11 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-12. Water supply and water discharge systems being owned by water 
consumer 
      1. The elements of water supply and water discharge system of the water consumer 
from the border of the balance accessory to the points of water analysis and 
wastewater discharge from sanitary and technical devices to the water discharge 


--- PAGE 86 ---

system shall be related to the water supply and water discharge systems of the water 
consumer and shall service on their own and on a contractual basis. 
      2. The device of water supply and water discharge systems of a water consumer 
must comply with the requirements established by the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-12 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 92-13. Ownerless water supply and water discharge system of settlement 
and (or) its constituent elements 
      1. The ownerless shall be water supply and water discharge system of settlement 
and (or) its constituent elements, not having an owner or owner of which is unknown 
either the owner of the right to which the owner refused. 
      2. The local executive body of the city of republican significance, capital, district, 
city of regional significance, when detecting ownerless water supply and water 
discharge systems of a settlement and (or) its constituent elements, shall conduct 
procedures for registering them as ownerless immovable things in accordance with 
Article 242 of the Civil Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      3. At the time of registration as ownerless immovable things, the water supply and 
water discharge system of the settlement and (or) its constituent elements shall be 
transferred to operation of the municipal organization for water supply and (or) water 
discharge. 
      4. The utility provider for water supply and (or) water discharge ensures the 
quality of drinking water supplied to a water consumer through an ownerless water 
supply system and (or) its constituent elements that handed over to it for operation. 
      Footnote. Chapter 16 is supplemented by Article 92-13 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 17. Use of water bodies for health and recreational purposes  
Article 93. Use of water bodies for recreational purposes  
       1. The water bodies, that have natural therapeutic qualities and that are favorable 
to health-care purposes shall be classified as health-improvement ones and used for 
healing purposes in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      2. The list of water bodies, intended for recreational purposes, upon the 
recommendations of the authorized body for healthcare, for environmental protection, 
for study and use of mineral resources shall be established of: 


--- PAGE 87 ---

      1) the republican significance - by the authorized body; 
      2) local significance – by the local executive agencies of regions (cities of 
republican significance, the capital). 
       3. Provision of water bodies for the recreational purposes shall be carried out in 
accordance with this Code and legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 93 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 94. Use of water bodies and water facilities for recreational purposes  
       1. Use of water bodies and water facilities for recreational purposes shall be 
allowed without a special permit, except for the water bodies, posing a potential 
mudflow hazard.  
      2. Places for mass recreation, tourism and sports on water bodies and water 
facilities are established by local executive bodies of the region (city of republican 
significance, the capital) in agreement with the basin inspectorates, an authorized state 
body in the field of environmental protection, a state body in the field of sanitary and 
epidemiological well-being of the population in compliance with environmental 
requirements and safety of human life . 
      3. Excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2017 № 73-VI 
(shall be enforced from 01.01.2018). 
      Footnote. Article 94, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 15.06.2017 № 73-VI (the order of enforcement 
see Art. 2); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 18. Use of water bodies and water facilities for agriculture  
Article 95. Use of water bodies and water facilities for agriculture  
       1. The use of water bodies for agricultural purposes shall be carried out as a 
general and special water use.  
      2. Primary water-users, on the basis of water-use plans of secondary water-users, 
draw up annual applications for receiving water volumes. The Basin Inspectorate, 
taking into account the forecasted water content of the year and on the basis of the 
applications of the primary water-users, sets the water-use limits for them. The 
volumes of water supplies for secondary water-users are determined by agreements 
concluded between primary and secondary water-users, taking into account the 
established limits. 


--- PAGE 88 ---

       3. Individuals and legal entities, possessing the water facilities for collection of 
melt, storm and flood waters in order to use them for agricultural purposes shall have a 
permit for a special water use.  
       4. The use of surface and underground water bodies for irrigation of pastures shall 
be carried out as a special water use.  
       5. The use of water bodies for livestock watering shall be allowed outside the 
sanitary protection zone and in the presence of watering sites and other devices, 
preventing water bodies’ pollution and contamination in the form of general water use.  
       6. The individuals, having private farms and engaged in gardening and 
horticulture, receive water for irrigation in the form of a special water use in 
accordance with the established limits. In the absence of sufficient water resources for 
irrigation, the water may be given through redistribution of limits of other water users.  
       7. Irrigation, drainage, flushing of the saline soils and other reclamation works 
shall be carried out in conjunction with environmental measures, protecting water 
bodies and their catchment areas. Monitoring and evaluation of irrigated lands shall be 
conducted by the specialized government agencies at the expense of the budget funds.  
       8. The use of wastewaters for irrigation shall be carried out in accordance with the 
established environmental and sanitary-epidemiological requirements.  
       9. In the irrigated area, the water users forecast the volume and quality of the 
return flows, plan the volumes of water discharge into the water bodies, create 
accumulating ponds and use them at the place of formation.  
      Footnote. Article 95, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); 
dated 10.07.2012 No 36-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication.); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 95-1. Hydro-technical amelioration  
       1. Hydro-technical amelioration shall be carried out to improve condition of dry, 
eroded, salinized, waterlogged, too wet lands, the status of which depends on 
influence of the water.  
      2. The types of hydro-technical amelioration include irrigation, land drainage and 
flushing of salinized soils. 
      Footnote. The Code is supplemented by Article 95-1, in accordance with the Law 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement 
see Art. 2); as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 13.06.2013 
No 102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 


--- PAGE 89 ---

publication).  
 
Article 96. Irrigation and drainage condominium  
       Irrigation and drainage condominium is a special form of property of a real estate 
as a single property complex (hereinafter - the object of irrigation and drainage 
condominium), where the property rights to land shall be owned by the individual and 
legal entities, and an irrigation and drainage system or its elements belong to them 
under the common share ownership.  
Article 97. Formation and termination of irrigation and drainage condominium  
       1. Irrigation and drainage condominium may be formed at the irrigated land plots, 
which are under one irrigation canal or its division, belonging to two or more land 
users or land owners.  
       2. Each of the owners of property rights to the land plots shall be entitled to 
exercise their rights to the land plot at their own discretion, regardless of their 
participation in irrigation and drainage condominium.  
       The land plots, occupied by water facilities that are a part of an irrigation and 
drainage condominium shall be related to the right-of-way and owned by the members 
of the irrigation and drainage condominium under the common share ownership right.  
       3. The number of shares of a participant of the irrigation and drainage 
condominium in common property shall be defined by the ratio of the irrigated land’s 
area, which belongs to the participant, to the total area of the whole irrigated land plot. 
Such a share in the property of the irrigation and drainage condominium may not be 
apportioned by physical demarcation (an ideal share).  
       4. An agreement of all participants of an irrigation and drainage condominium 
may not define the share in the common property, and in this case the irrigation and 
drainage condominium’s property is under the common ownership, which shall not 
subject to division.  
       5. Transfer of the property right to the irrigated land plot (except for the 
termination of the secondary rights to temporary land use) to another person entails the 
transfer of the share in irrigation and drainage condominium to the purchaser.  
       6. A member of an irrigation and drainage condominium shall not be entitled to 
alienate its share in the irrigation and drainage condominium separately from the right 
to the irrigated land plot.  
       7. The use of the common property of the irrigation and drainage condominium as 
a collateral is possible under the consent of all the participants.  
       8. Irrigation and drainage condominium may be liquidated when transferring a 
property right for all irrigated land plots (except for the secondary right for temporary 


--- PAGE 90 ---

land use), serviced by the irrigation and drainage condominium, and a property right 
for the irrigation and drainage condominium to one person.  
Article 98. Registration of an object of an irrigation and drainage condominium  
      1. An object of an irrigation and drainage condominium shall be registered as a 
single set in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on 
registration of rights to immovable assets. 
       2. Registration of an object of an irrigation and drainage condominium shall be 
carried out in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 98, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
25.03.2011 No 421-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication.)  
 
Article 99. Rights of the participants of an irrigation and drainage condominium  
       1. All participants of an irrigation and drainage condominium have the right to 
manage the common property, proportionate to the share of their participation in 
irrigation and drainage condominium.  
       2. Each participant of an irrigation and drainage condominium has the right to use 
the common property. The order for using the common property of the irrigation and 
drainage condominium shall be defined by an agreement of the participants.  
       Transfer of a land plot for lease to other persons (the secondary right of temporary 
land use) does not entail termination of the landowner’s participation in the irrigation 
and drainage condominium.  
       3. Participants of the irrigation and drainage condominium also have other rights 
that do not contradict the Law s of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 100. Responsibilities of the participants of an irrigation and drainage 
condominium 
       1. Participants of an irrigation and drainage condominium shall:  
       1) participate in all the expenses, required for maintenance of the common 
property;  
       2) ensure safety and safe use of the common property.  
       2. The participants of the irrigation and drainage condominium also have other 
duties, specified by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 101. Particularities of participation in an irrigation and drainage 
condominium  
       1. The expenditures for maintenance of common property shall be specified in 
proportion to the participant’s share in the common property, unless otherwise 
provided by the agreement of the participants of an irrigation and drainage 
condominium.  


--- PAGE 91 ---

      2. In case if an irrigated land plot in the irrigation and drainage condominium is 
not used by its participant, the participant shall not be released from the expenditures, 
required for maintenance of the common property. ] 
       3. Land tenants of the irrigated land plots have no voting rights and may not 
otherwise manage the object of the irrigation and drainage condominium, but shall 
comply with the rules, common for all the participants of the irrigation and drainage 
condominium.  
       4. Participants of the irrigation and drainage condominium do not have the right to 
alienate common property of the condominium on her/his own name.  
Article 102. Management of an object of an irrigation and drainage 
condominium  
      1. Within a month after the registration of the irrigation and drainage 
condominium, the participants of the irrigation and drainage condominium shall be 
required to decide an issue on the form of its management. ] 
       2. The form of management of the irrigation and drainage condominium shall be 
specified by an agreement of the participants in accordance with the legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan.  
 Chapter 19. Use of water bodies and water facilities for industry and energy  
Article 103. Use of water bodies and water facilities for industry and heat-and-
power engineering  
       1. Water bodies and water facilities for industry and thermal power engineering 
shall be used in the order of a special water use.  
       2. Industrial and heat-and-power organizations shall be obliged to have recycling 
water supply, with the exception of existing or reconstructed heat-and-power 
organizations that use water supply systems for cooling from water bodies or cooling 
ponds.  
      Organizations that do not have circulating water supply, with the exception of 
operating or reconstructed heat and power organizations using water supply systems 
for cooling from water bodies or cooling ponds, are obliged to submit to the basin 
inspection , an authorized state body in the field of environmental protection, a state 
body in the field of sanitary epidemiological well-being of the population; a plan for 
the transition to circulating water supply with specific dates. 
       3. Groundwater not classified as drinking and mineral water, as well as water 
taken along with other minerals (mine, quarry, mine water) may be used for technical 
water supply and for other industrial needs under special water use conditions in 
compliance with environmental requirements.  
       4. Underground water, mined simultaneously with other minerals, posing a threat 
to public health and the environment shall be subject to mandatory recycling.  


--- PAGE 92 ---

      5. The use of drinking water for industry, if it is possible to use water of a different 
quality, is not allowed, with the exception of those organizations where it is provided 
by the technological process. In emergency situations of a natural and man-made 
nature, local executive bodies of the region (city of republican significance, the 
capital) have the right to temporarily permit the consumption of drinking water for 
industrial purposes, taking into account the priority satisfaction of the drinking and 
household needs of the population. The terms of consumption of drinking water for 
industrial needs are established in agreement with the basin inspection . 
       6. In the event of emergency situations of natural and man-made origin, the 
Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and local executive bodies of oblast (city 
of republican status, the capital), in the order, prescribed by the Laws of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan shall be entitled to restrict, suspend or prohibit industrial and heat 
power enterprises to use the water bodies and water facilities.  
      Footnote. Article 103, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement See 
Art. 2); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication); № 126-VI dated 27.12.2017 (shall be enforced 
upon the xpiration of  six months after the date of its first official publication); dated 
October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
the day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 104. Use of water bodies and water facilities for hydropower engineering  
      1. The use of water bodies and water facilities for hydropower is carried out in the 
order of special water-use, taking into account the interests of other sectors of the 
economy, compliance with the requirements of the integrated use of water and their 
protection in agreement with the basin inspectorate and other interested state bodies, 
and in mudflow hazardous areas - with the authorized body in the sphere of civil 
protection. 
       2. The organizations, using hydropower and hydraulic facilities at the water 
bodies shall provide:  
       1) the established regime of filling and drawdown of reservoirs, observing the 
priority of drinking water supply;  
       2) the need of fisheries in the areas of the rivers and reservoirs, that are essential 
for preservation and reproduction of fish resources in the flood plains and deltas;  
       3) unimpeded passage of ships and rafts;  
       4) implementation of the established environmental, sanitary and epidemiological 
and emergency releases.  


--- PAGE 93 ---

      3. If, due to the changes in the natural level of water bodies, resulting from filling 
and drawdown of reservoirs, the individual and (or) legal entities were damaged, the 
Law breakers shall reimburse the damage in accordance with the Laws of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 104, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 26.05.2008 No 34-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 11.04.2014 № 
189-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
 Chapter 20. Use of water bodies and water facilities for transport, timber rafting, anti-fire needs  
Article 105. Use of water bodies and water facilities for transport and timber 
rafting  
       1. Surface water bodies of the Republic of Kazakhstan, classified as the navigable 
waterways, are public waterways, except for the cases when their use is prohibited 
wholly or partially for this purpose or when they are given to solitary use.  
      2. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 28.12.2010 No 
369-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication.)  
 
      3. Approval of the procedure for classifying water bodies as navigable and the list 
of navigable waterways is carried out by the authorized body for water transport. 
      4. Timber rafting on water bodies used for navigation without ship's propulsion is 
prohibited. Mole rafting on water bodies is prohibited. Organizations that carry out 
timber rafting are obliged to regularly clean water bodies from sunken wood. The list 
of water bodies used for timber rafting, and the procedure for their cleaning are 
determined by the local executive bodies of regions ( cities of republican significance, 
the capital) in agreement with the basin inspectorate and the authorized state body in 
the field of environmental protection. 
       5. The water bodies are used for boating and for take-off (landing) of aircraft in 
accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      6. When using the water bodies and water management facilities, intended for 
shipping, timber rafting, take-off (landing) of aircraft, the water users shall: 
      1) ensure the rational use and protection of waters; 
       2) comply with the requirements of the bodies, regulating navigation;  
      3) prevent discharge of household waste and pollutants into the water bodies; 


--- PAGE 94 ---

       4) prevent destruction of the beds and banks of water bodies and water 
management, hydraulic engineering and other facilities;  
       5) not violate the rights of other individuals and legal entities.  
      Footnote. Article 105, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 28.12.2010 No 369-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication.); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V 
(shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); 
№ 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the expiration of ten calendar 
days after the day of its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 106. Use of water bodies and water facilities for anti-fire needs  
       1. Water intake for firefighting shall be allowed from any water body without a 
special permission.  
      2. The choice of a place for water intake for the purposes provided for in 
paragraph 1 of this article, its arrangement (piers, entrances, light indicators) should be 
carried out by local executive bodies of regions, cities of republican significance, the 
capital in agreement with the territorial divisions of the authorized body in the field of 
civil protection in compliance with conditions set by the department of the authorized 
body and the authorized body in the field of environmental protection. 
       3. Legal entities with appropriate facilities and anti-fire equipment at their water 
supply systems shall be required to maintain them in good condition.  
       4. It is prohibited to use for other purposes the water from water bodies and water 
facilities, designed especially for firefighting needs.  
      Footnote. Article 106 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 
2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 21. Use of water facilities or their parts for fisheries and hunting 
      Footnote. Chapter 21 is in the wording the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 15.06.2017 № 73-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its 
first official publication). 
Article 107. Use of water facilities or their parts for fisheries and fishing 
resources and other aquatic animals 


--- PAGE 95 ---

      1. The right to use fish resources and other aquatic animals and to fish on water 
facilities or their parts important for the conservation, reproduction and extraction of 
fish resources and other aquatic animals (including for fishing), fisheries and 
technological reservoirs shall be granted in accordance with the legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan in the field of protection, reproduction and use of the animal 
world. 
      The user of fish resources and other aquatic animals shall has the right to receive 
water facilities or their parts for use in accordance with this Code. 
      2. Individuals and legal entities, who received water facilities or the parts for 
fisheries and fishing resources and other aquatic animals shall be obliged to: 
      1) carry out, in agreement with the basin inspectorate and the authorized state body 
in 
the 
field 
of 
protection, 
reproduction 
and use 
of 
wildlife , stocking and fishery reclamation , ensuring the improvement of the condition 
of water bodies or their parts, and reproduction of fish resources and other aquatic 
animals; 
       2) keep the shores of water facilities or their parts at the places of their use in 
accordance with the sanitary-epidemiological and environmental requirements, 
established by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      3. Water facilities or their parts, except for those located in the territory of state 
natural reserves, fish farms, pond, lake and other fisheries, as well as the water 
reservoirs of drinking and domestic water supply, may be used by individuals for 
amateur (sport) fishing in compliance with the established rules of fishing. 
      Footnote. Article 107 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 399-VI (shall enter into force 
upon the expiry of ten calendar days after the day of the first official publication). 
 
Article 108. Use of water facilities or their parts for conduct of hunting 
      1. Water bodies or their parts are provided for the use of individuals and legal 
entities for hunting management by the local executive body of the region, city of 
republican significance, the capital in agreement with the local representative body, 
the basin inspectorate and the authorized state body in the field of protection, 
reproduction and use of wildlife. 
       2. Upon operation of reservoirs, lakes and other water facilities or their parts, as 
well as facilities located in the water area of water facilities, the regime of use of 
which affects the habitats of birds and water animals, shall compliance with the 
necessary hydrological regime of wetlands and the interests of hunting farms.  


--- PAGE 96 ---

      3. Carrying out fishery reclamation, cultivation of plants on water bodies or their 
parts, useful for hunting in the habitats of valuable, rare and endangered species of 
animals, shall be carried out in agreement with the basin inspectorate and the 
authorized state body in the field of protection, reproduction and use of the animal 
world. 
      4. In the habitats of valuable, rare and endangered species of animals , as well as in 
areas where activities for the reproduction and protection of fauna are carried out, 
local executive bodies of regions, cities of republican significance, the capital 
in agreement with the basin inspection, an authorized state body in In the area of 
protection, reproduction and use of the animal world, the stay of individuals, amateur 
(sports) and commercial hunting, construction of the coastal strip and other actions 
that worsen the condition of water bodies or their parts, and hunting management may 
be limited. 
      Footnote. Article 108 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 22. Use of water bodies of the specially protected natural areas. Use of water reservoirs and 
retaining hydraulic structures in rivers and canals  
Article 109. Use of water bodies of the specially protected natural areas  
       Use of water bodies of the specially protected areas shall be carried out in the 
order, specified by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on the specially 
protected natural territories.  
Article 110. Reservoirs’ operation  
       1. The water reservoirs shall be created in order to regulate surface runoff and 
meet the needs of water users.  
       2. Design, construction and operation of water reservoirs shall be carried out, 
taking into account all the possible negative consequences of such interference into the 
existing natural and economic systems.  
       3. The water reservoirs are available for use under the requirements of hydro-
geological and engineering and geotechnical conditions and the conditions for 
conservation of environmental sustainability, sanitary and epidemiological and 
radiological safety, satisfaction of the interests of the population and industries.  
      4. The procedure for the operation of reservoirs is determined by the rules of 
organizations operating reservoirs, developed in accordance with the rules specified in 
subparagraphs 7-7) and 13-1) of paragraph 1 of Article 37 of this Code. 
       5. The organizations, operating the water reservoirs, water-pipe and water intake 
facilities at them shall be obliged to observe the regime of filling and discharge of the 


--- PAGE 97 ---

reservoirs, established for the interests of water users and land users, located in the 
zones of the reservoirs’ influence.  
      6. Control over the observance of the rules for the operation of reservoirs is carried 
out by the department of the authorized body and basin inspections . 
       7. This article’s provisions shall be also applied to the operation of lakes and other 
water bodies, used as water reservoirs.  
      Footnote. Article 110 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 111. Operation of retaining hydraulic structures on rivers and canals  
       1. Operation of retaining hydraulic structures in rivers and canals shall be 
conducted in accordance with their intended use, conditions and norms, elaborated 
during designing of these structures.  
      2. Regulation by water-users of surface runoff with the help of retaining hydraulic 
structures is carried out taking into account shipping, integrated use and protection of 
water resources of a given river basin on the basis of a permit for special water-use. 
      3. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 28.04.2016 № 506-
V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty calendar days after its first official 
publication). 
 
      3-1. The owners of retaining hydraulic structures that meet the criteria for 
classifying dams as declared ones approved by the authorized body are required to 
declare their safety. 
      4. The development of the dam safety declaration (hereinafter - the declaration) is 
carried out by the owner independently, or at his expense by a third-party organization 
certified for the right to carry out works in the field of dam safety. 
      5. The declaration is subject to examination in an organization certified by the 
department of the authorized body for the right to carry out works in the field of dam 
safety, at the expense of the applicant organization. 
      6. To assign a registration code to the declaration, the applicant submits to 
the basin inspectorate an application and a copy of the declaration together with a 
copy of the expert opinion. 
      The Basin Inspectorate, having considered the submitted documents, makes a 
decision on the registration of the declaration or presents a reasoned refusal. 
      A copy of the declaration registered by the basin inspectorate is kept by the basin 
inspectorate . 


--- PAGE 98 ---

      7. The list of dams and organizations that have registered dam safety declarations 
shall be posted on the internet-resources of the authorized body. 
      8. In case of change the conditions affecting for safety of dam, the declaration 
shall be subject to change. 
      While amendments to the declaration, it shall be subject to re-examination and 
registration no later than three months after amendment. 
      Footnote. Article 111 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 20 December, 2004 No 13; dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced from 
01.01.2015); dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (the order of enforcement see Article 2); 
dated 28.12.2018 № 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration of  ten calendar 
days after the day of its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
 Section 7. Protection of water bodies and the fight against harmful effects of waters  
Chapter 23. Water protection activities 
 Article 112. Protection of water bodies 
      1. Water bodies shall be protected from: 
       1) natural and man-made pollution by harmful hazardous chemicals and toxic 
substances and their compounds, heat, bacteria, radiation and other contaminations;  
       2) pollution by solid, insoluble objects, industrial wastes, household and other 
wastes;  
      3) exhaustion 
       2. Water facilities shall be protected in order to prevent:  
       1) misbalance of environmental sustainability of the natural systems;  
      2) harm to the life and health of the population; 
       3) reduction of fish stocks and other aquatic animals;  
       4) deterioration of water supply;  
       5) reduction of ability of water bodies to the natural rehabilitation and 
purification;  
       6) deterioration of hydrological and hydro-geological regime of water bodies;  
       7) other adverse events that negatively affect the physical, chemical and biological 
properties of water bodies.  
       3. The water bodies shall be protected through:  
       1) making general requirements for protection of water bodies to all water users, 
engaged in any kind of water use;  
       2) making special requirements for certain types of economic activity;  


--- PAGE 99 ---

       3) improvement and use of water protection measures with introduction of new 
technology and environmentally, epidemiologically safe technologies;  
       4) establishment of protection zones, shelterbelts of water bodies, sanitary 
protection zones of the drinking water sources;  
       5) the state and other control over the use and protection of water bodies;  
       6) sanctions for failure to comply with the requirements for the water bodies’ 
protection.  
      4. Central and local executive bodies of oblasts (cities of republican importance, 
the capital), in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, shall 
take measures compatible with the principle of sustainable development to preserve 
water bodies, prevent their pollution, pollution and depletion, as well as to eliminate 
the consequences of these phenomena. 
       5. Individuals and legal entities, whose activities affect the status of water bodies 
shall be obliged to observe the environmental requirements, set by the environmental 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, and to conduct organizational, 
technological, forest reclamation, land treatment, hydraulic, sanitary-epidemiological 
and other measures to protect water bodies from pollution, contamination and 
depletion.  
      Footnote. Article 112, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 09.01.2007 No 213 (the order of enforcement see Art. 
2); dated 21.01.2010 No 242-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); № 210-VI 
dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the xpiration of ten calendar days after the 
date of its first official publication). 
 
Article 113. Protection of water bodies from pollution  
       1. Pollution of water bodies is the dumping or input of contaminants into the 
water bodies, worsening the quality of water and impeding the use of water bodies.  
       2. The water bodies shall be carried out from all kinds of pollution, including 
diffuse pollution (pollution through the surface of the earth and air).  
       3. In order to protect the water bodies from contamination, it is prohibited:  
      
1) 
the 
use 
of pesticides, fertilizers on 
the water 
protection zones 
of water bodies . Disinfection , disinsection and deratization measures in 
the catchment area and the sanitary protection zone of water bodies are carried out in 
agreement with the state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of 
the population ; 
       2) discharge and disposal of radioactive and toxic substances in the water bodies;  


--- PAGE 100 ---

       3) discharge of wastewater of industrial and food production facilities into the 
water bodies, that do not have water treatment plants and do not provide effective 
cleaning in accordance with the regulations;  
       4) performance of blasting works at the water bodies, when nuclear and other 
types of technology are used, accompanied by the release of radioactive and toxic 
substances;  
       5) the use of equipment and technology in water bodies and facilities that pose a 
threat to human health and the environment.  
      Footnote. Article 113 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 114. Protection of water bodies from pollution  
       1. Pollution of water bodies is the transfer of solid, industrial, household and other 
wastes, and the suspended particles, worsening hydrological condition of the water 
body and aggravating the water use.  
       2. Discharge and burial of solid, industrial, household and other wastes into the 
water bodies shall be prohibited.  
       3. Clogging of catchment areas of water bodies, ice water bodies, glaciers with 
solid, industrial, household and other wastes, the washout of which shall entail 
deterioration of surface and underground water bodies is prohibited.  
Article 115. Protection of water bodies from depletion  
       1. Depletion of water bodies is the lowering of the minimal level of runoff, 
surface water reserves or reduction of underground water reserves.  
       2. In order to prevent depletion of water bodies, the individuals or legal entities, 
using the water bodies, shall:  
       1) avoid above-limit irrevocable water intake from the water bodies;  
       2) in water protection zones and plowing lands, sanitation of livestock, 
construction and other types of economic activity, leading to depletion of water bodies 
is prohibited;  
       3) take water protection measures.  
      3. Water protection measures, aimed at prevention of water from exhaustion, 
conducted by individuals and legal entities, previously agreed with the basin 
inspection , the authorized state body in the field of environmental protection and the 
authorized body for the study of the subsoil . 
      Footnote. Article 115 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 


--- PAGE 101 ---

day of its first official publication). 
 
Article 116. Water protection zones and the strips of water bodies  
      Footnote. Title of Article 116 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty 
calendar days after its first official publication). 
       1. In order to maintain the water bodies in the condition, meeting the sanitary and 
environmental requirements, to prevent pollution and depletion of surface waters and 
protect flora and fauna, the protection zones and strips shall be established with the 
special conditions of use, except for the water bodies, included in the list of the 
specially protected areas and the state forest fund.  
      2. Water protection zones, stripes and the mode of their economic use are 
established by local executive bodies of regions, cities of republican significance, the 
capital on the basis of approved project documentation agreed with basin 
inspectorates, a state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the 
population, an authorized state body in the field of environmental protection 
environment, by the authorized body for land relations, and in mudflow hazardous 
areas - with the authorized body in the field of civil protection. 
      While, the development of project documentation shall be carried out in a period 
not exceeding ten months. The term of consideration, coordination and approval of 
project documentation shall not exceed two months from the date of its submission to 
the local executive bodies of regions, cities of republican significance, the capital. The 
establishment of water protection zones and strips, as well as the regime of their 
economic use shall be carried out within one month from the date of approval of the 
project documentation. 
      In cases of natural or artificial changes in the boundaries of a water body, the 
established boundaries of water protection zones and strips shall be specified in the 
manner and time determined in the part one of this paragraph. 
      3. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 25.01.2012 No 
548-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication.)  
      4. Is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 25.01.2012 No 
548-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication.)  
 
      5. The rules for establishing the boundaries of water protection zones and strips 
shall be approved by the authorized body. 


--- PAGE 102 ---

      Footnote. Article 116, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 26.05.2008 No 34-IV (the order of enforcement see 
Art. 2); dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 2); dated 
10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 25.01.2012 No 548-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of 
ten calendar days after its first official publication.); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall 
be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 
29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication); dated 28.04.2016 № 506-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of 
sixty calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication). 
 
Article 117. Sanitary protection zones of waters  
      1. In order to protect waters used for drinking water supply, therapeutic, resort and 
other health-improving needs of the population, local executive bodies of oblasts 
(cities of republican importance, the capital) shall establish sanitary protection zones. 
      2. The procedure for establishing sanitary protection zones and sanitary protection 
zones is determined by the state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological 
welfare of the population .  
      Footnote. Article 117 amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; № 210-VI dated 28.12.2018 (shall be enforced upon the 
expiration of ten calendar days after the date of its first official publication). 
 
Article 118. The zones of ecological emergency situation or ecological disaster on 
water bodies  
       1. The water bodies, where in the result of an economic activity or natural 
processes, various changes are happening, threatening public health, flora and fauna 
and the environment, are the zones of ecological emergency or environmental disaster.  
       2. Environmental emergency on water bodies or river basins and underground 
water fields shall be declared by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
 Article 119. Provision of land plots in water protection zones and strips for temporary use and control 
over compliance with the requirements for regime of economic activities at the water protection zones 
and strips 
      Footnote. Title of Article 119 is in the wording the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 20.02.2017 № 48-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of sixty 
calendar days after its first official publication). 
      1. Land plots in water protection zones of water bodies may be provided for 
temporary use to individuals and legal entities in the manner prescribed by 


--- PAGE 103 ---

the land legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, subject to compliance with the 
established requirements for the regime of economic activity. 
      1-1. Agricultural land in water protection zones can be provided to individuals and 
legal entities for land use for haymaking and grazing by local executive bodies in 
accordance with the Plan for the management of pastures and their use in agreement 
with the basin inspectorates. 
      2. State control over compliance with the requirements for the regime of economic 
activity in water protection zones and lanes shall be carried out by the agency of the 
authorized body, basin inspections, the authorized state body in the field of 
environmental protection, the territorial subdivision of the department of the central 
authorized body for land management within their competence. 
      Footnote. Article 119, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; dated 20.02.2017 № 48-VI (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 
2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its 
first official publication); dated 30.06.2021 № 59-VII shall enter into force from 
01.01.2022). 
 
Article 120. Peculiarities of protection of underground water bodies  
      1. Individuals and legal entities, whose industrial activity may have an adverse 
impact on underground waters, are obliged to monitor underground waters and to take 
timely measures to prevent pollution and depletion of water resources and the harmful 
effects of waters. 
      2. In the contours of the fields and groundwater areas, which are used or may be 
used for drinking water supply, it is prohibited to carry out operations on subsoil use, 
placement of burials of radioactive and chemical wastes, landfills, cemeteries, cattle 
burials (biothermal pits) and other objects affecting the condition of groundwater. 
       3. It is prohibited to irrigate lands with wastewaters if it affects or may affect the 
status of underground waters.  
      4. Hydrogeological wells, including self-discharging and exploratory wells, as well 
as wells, which are not suitable for operation or use of which is stopped, are subject to 
equipment with preservation devices or are liquidated. 
       Elimination and preservation of hydrogeological wells shall be carried out by the 
well owners.    
      Liquidation and preservation of ownerless self-discharging hydrogeological wells 
shall be carried out by the authorized body for the study of subsurface resources at the 
expense of the budget funds. 


--- PAGE 104 ---

      5. At carrying out of operations on subsoil use the subsoil user is obliged to take 
measures on protection of underground waters. 
       6. Individuals and legal entities, operating the underground water intake facilities 
shall organize the sanitary protection zones and underground water monitoring.  
       7. Underground water intake during construction and operation of drainage 
systems at the reclaimed land plots shall be allowed with a permit for a special water 
use.  
       8. During placement, designing, construction, and commissioning of water intake 
structures, associated with the use of underground waters, the measures shall be taken 
to prevent their harmful effect on surface water bodies and the environment.  
       9. During geological study of subsoil, prospecting and mining, construction and 
operation of underground facilities, not related to mining, the subsurface users shall be 
obliged to take measures to prevent pollution and depletion of underground waters.  
      Footnote. Article 120 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 17.01.2014 No 165-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 15.06.2015 № 
322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); № 126-VI of 27.12.2017 (shall be enfored upon the expiration of  (shall 
be enforced upon the expiration of ten calendar days after the date of its first official 
publication). 
 
 Chapter 24. Small water bodies and peculiarities of their protection  
Article 121. Small water bodies 
       1. Small water bodies are the natural water bodies that have the following sizes:  
       the closed water bodies - a water surface area of ??up to ten hectares;  
      the rivers – the streams of up to two hundred kilometers. 
       2. Water resources of small water bodies shall be carried out in order of general 
water use.  
      3. The use of water resources of small water objects as a special water use shall be 
possible after the authorized body has studied the impact of the consequences of such 
water use on the state of water resources and if there is a positive conclusion of a state 
environmental assessment or environmental permit, mandatory in accordance with the 
Environmental Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan. 
      Footnote. Article 121 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
28.10.2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the 
day of its first official publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 401-VI (shall enter into force 


--- PAGE 105 ---

from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 122. Peculiarities of protection of small water bodies  
      1. The general water-use and mode of economic activity in the range of water 
protection zones and strips of small water bodies, as well as to prevent and eliminate 
pollution of their actions, contamination and exhaustion established by local executive 
bodies of regions ( cities of republican status, capital) by agreement with the basin 
inspections , an authorized state body in the field of environmental protection and a 
state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, 
and in mudflow-prone regions - with an authorized body in the field of civil 
protection. 
       2. In order to prevent depletion, pollution and degradation of small water bodies, 
the local executive bodies of oblasts, cities of republican significance, the capital take 
a number of measures for their protection and rehabilitation in accordance with the 
documents of the state planning System of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      3. Individuals and legal entities whose economic activities affect the state and 
regime of small water bodies are obliged to carry out measures agreed with 
the department of the authorized body to restore water resources of small water bodies 
and preserve the purity of their waters. 
      Footnote. Article 122, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 26.05.2008 No 34-IV (the order of enforcement see 
Art. 2); dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 28.12.2018 
№ 210-VI (shall be enforced upon the expiration  after ten calendar days after the day 
of its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
 Chapter 25. Prevention and elimination of harmful effects of waters  
Article 123. Duties of the state bodies, individual and legal entities for prevention 
and elimination of harmful impacts of waters 
       State bodies, individual and legal entities shall take measures to prevent and 
eliminate the following harmful effects of waters:  
      flood, under flooding; 
       destruction of banks, dams and other facilities;  
       water logging and salinization;  
       erosion of soil and water bodies, formation of gullies, landslides, mudslides and 
other harmful events.  


--- PAGE 106 ---

Article 124. The procedures for prevention and elimination of harmful effects of 
waters  
       1. Water supply organizations, water users, individuals and legal entities shall be 
obliged to plan and conduct preventive and current activities for protection of human 
settlements, industrial facilities, agricultural lands, the protected territories from the 
harmful effects of waters.  
       Funding of preventive and current activities on prevention and elimination of 
harmful effects of waters shall be provided at the expense of water users and the 
budget.  
       When conducting the actions on prevention and elimination of harmful effects of 
waters, individuals and legal entities shall:  
       1) comply with the safety standards and rules of water management systems and 
facilities 
during 
their 
construction, 
commissioning, 
operation, 
reparation, 
reconstruction, conservation, decommissioning and liquidation;  
       2) analyze systematically the lowering safety of water systems and facilities;  
      3) conduct regular inspections of water systems and facilities; 
       4) create financial and material reserves, intended for liquidation of emergencies 
at the water management systems and facilities;  
       5) maintain local emergency warning systems for water systems and facilities in 
constant readiness.  
       2. Emergency situations of natural and man-made origin, caused by the harmful 
effects of waters shall be liquidated in accordance with the legislation of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 124, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
 Chapter 26. The order of works at water bodies, water protection zones and strips  
Article 125. Conditions for placement, designing, construction, reconstruction 
and putting enterprises to operation and other facilities at the water bodies, 
water protection zones and strips  
       1. Within the water protection strips the following activities shall be prohibited:  
       1) economic and other activities, worsening the quality and hydrological condition 
of water bodies (pollution, contamination, depletion);  
      2) construction and operation of buildings and structures, excluding water 
management and water intake structures and their communications, bridges, bridge 
structures, berths, ports, piers and other transport infrastructure facilities related to the 
activities of water transport, commercial fishing, fish farming facilities associated with 
the location and maintenance of fish farms and communications thereto, fishery 


--- PAGE 107 ---

technological reservoirs, facilities for the use of renewable energy sources 
(hydrodynamic water energy), as well as recreational zones on a water body, not 
involving the construction of buildings and structures for leisure and (or) recreational 
purposes; 
       3) provision of land plots for gardening and dacha construction;  
       4) operation of the existing facilities, that are not provided with equipment and 
devices to prevent pollution of water bodies and water protection zones and strips;  
       5) the works, disturbing the soil and grass cover (including plowing, grazing, 
mining), except for cultivation of lands for grassing of separate land plots, sowing and 
planting of forest;  
       6) placement of campsites, permanent parking for vehicles, summer camps for 
livestock;  
      7) application of all types of pesticides and fertilizers. 
       2. Within the water protection zones shall be prohibited:  
       1) to commission new and renovated facilities, that are not provided with 
equipment and devices to prevent pollution and contamination of water bodies and 
their water protection zones and strips;  
      2) reconstruction of buildings, structures, communications and other facilities, as 
well as the production of construction, dredging and blasting operations, mining, 
laying cables, pipelines and other communications, drilling, land and other works 
without projects agreed in the prescribed manner with local executive bodies, basin 
inspectorates, an authorized state body in the field of environmental protection, a state 
body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population and other 
interested bodies; 
      3) placement and construction of warehouses for storing fertilizers, pesticides, oil 
products, maintenance points, washing vehicles and agricultural machinery, 
mechanical workshops, arranging landfills for household and industrial waste, sites for 
refueling equipment with pesticides, runways for conducting aviation chemical works, 
as well as the placement of other objects that negatively affect the quality of water; 
       4) to place livestock farms and complexes, sewage ponds, wastewater irrigation 
fields, cemeteries, animal burial grounds, as well as other objects, posing threat of 
microbial contamination of surface and underground waters;  
       5) cattle grazing in excess of the normal load, bathing and sanitization of livestock 
and other economic activities, worsening the water bodies’ regime;  
      
6) application 
of 
the method 
of aerial 
treatment 
with pesticides and aerial fertilization with mineral fertilizers of agricultural crops and 


--- PAGE 108 ---

forest plantations at a distance of fewer than two thousand meters from the water edge 
in a water source; 
      7) the application of pesticides, which are not set the maximum allowable 
concentration, fertilization on snow cover, as well as use as a fertilizer uncleared 
manured effluentss and persistent organochlorine pesticides . 
       During the forced decontamination, the use of low- and average-toxic non-
persistent pesticides shall be allowed at the water protection zones.  
      3. Design, construction and placement of new facilities (buildings, structures, their 
complexes 
and 
communications) on 
water bodies and 
( or ) water 
protection zones ( except water protection zones ), 
as 
well 
as 
reconstruction 
(expansion, modernization, technical re-equipment, re-profiling) of existing facilities, 
erected 
before 
the land plots occupied 
by 
them 
are 
classified as water 
protection zones and strips or other specially protected natural areas, are coordinated 
with the basin inspectorates, the authorized state body in the field of environmental 
protection, the authorized body for the study of subsoil, the state body in the field of 
sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population, authorized body in the field of 
veterinary medicine, local executive bodies of the region (city of republican 
significance, the capital). 
      The approval procedure shall be determined by the rules of the organization of 
construction and pass of licensing procedures for construction, approved in accordance 
with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan on architectural, urban planning and 
construction activities. 
       The same activities on water facilities, posing a potential mudflow hazard shall be 
agreed with the authorized body for civil safety, and at navigable waterways - with the 
authorized body for water transport.  
       4. Construction projects of new or reconstruction (expansion, modernization, 
technical re-equipment, conversion) of the existing facilities, the use of which may 
have a negative impact on the status of water bodies, shall provide the closed 
(undrained) technical water supply systems.  
      
5. 
Conservation 
and liquidation ( post-utilization ) 
of existing ( under 
construction ) facilities that may have a negative impact on the state of water bodies 
are carried out in agreement with the basin inspectorates, an authorized state body in 
the field of environmental protection, a state body in the field of sanitary and 
epidemiological welfare of the population, by the authorized body for the study of 
subsoil and other state bodies in the manner prescribed by the laws of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan. 


--- PAGE 109 ---

       6. Construction projects of transport or engineering infrastructure through the 
water bodies shall provide the actions for flood waters’ passing, operating regime of 
water bodies, prevention of pollution and depletion of water, prevention of their 
harmful effects.  
      These projects are subject to approval by the basin inspectorates, the authorized 
state body in the field of environmental protection, the authorized body for the study 
of subsoil , the state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the 
population, the authorized body in the field of energy supply. 
      7. Construction (reconstruction, overhaul repair) of enterprises, buildings, facilities 
and engineering communications shall be prohibited in the protection water zones and 
strips without the projects, agreed in accordance with the established legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, and received a positive conclusion of the comprehensive 
private expertise of construction projects (technical and economic feasibility, design 
and estimate documentation), including the conclusions of industry expertise. 
      Footnote. Article 125 is in the wording the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV; as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 28.12.2010 No 369-IV (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication.); dated 04.07.2013 No 128-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 17.01.2014 No 
165-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 11.04.2014 № 189-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten 
calendar days after its first official publication); dated 29.12.2014 № 269-V (shall be 
enforced from 01.01.2015); dated 28.10.2015 № 366-V (shall be enforced upon expiry 
of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated October 28, 2019 № 268-
VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official 
publication); dated 02.01.2021 № 399-VI ((shall enter into force upon the expiry of 
ten calendar days after the day of the first official publication).);  dated 06.04.2024 № 
71-VIII (shall take effect sixty calendar days after the date of its first official 
publication). 
 
 Article 126. Performance of work on water bodies and their water protection zones and belts 
      1. Building, dredging and blasting, mining and other resources, the laying of 
cables, pipelines and other communications, logging, drilling and other work 
on water facilities and water protection zones , impact on the state of water bodies, 
made by agreement with the basin inspections , an authorized state body in the field of 
environmental protection, a state body in the field of sanitary and epidemiological 
well-being of the population, local executive bodies of the region (city of republican 


--- PAGE 110 ---

significance, the capital), on water bodies classified as navigable - in addition to the 
water transport authorities. 
      2. The procedure for carrying out work on water bodies and their water 
protection zones is determined for each water body separately, taking into account 
their condition, the requirements for maintaining the environmental sustainability of 
the environment in agreement with the basin inspectorates , an authorized state body 
in the field of environmental protection, a state body in the field of sanitary-
epidemiological well-being of the population, local executive bodies of the region 
(city of republican significance, the capital) and other interested state bodies. 
      Footnote. Article 126 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
20 December, 2004 No 13; dated October 28, 2019 № 268-VI (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after the day of its first official publication). 
 
 Section 8. Peculiarities of the legal regulation of economic activities on water bodies of the special 
national significance  
Chapter 27. Water bodies of the special national significance  
Article 127. The legal regime of economic activity in water bodies of the special 
state significance  
       The legal regime of economic activities’ regulation on the water bodies of the 
special national significance shall include:  
       1) the stable development of the region on the basis of the balance between the 
economic interests and environmental, cultural and historical components;  
       2) maintenance of the water level in the water bodies of a natural water complex 
at the level of not lower than the set one;  
       3) effective use of water resources through the continuous improvement of 
technological schemes and organizational and economic forms of the facilities’ 
operation;  
       4) improvement of the water basin and the water body;  
       5) enhancement of the role of society in preservation of economic and resource 
potential of the region and its sanitary and epidemiological and environmental welfare;  
       6) preservation and reproduction of fish resources, flora and fauna;  
      7) development of a recreational complex; 
       8) strengthening of Law and environmental Law order.  
Article 128. Peculiarities of protection of water bodies of the special national 
significance 
       The peculiarities of protection of the water bodies of special national significance 
shall be:  


--- PAGE 111 ---

       1) zoning and establishment of water and environmental standards separately for 
each zone;  
       2) regulation of anthropogenic load on water bodies and their eco-system;  
       3) recording of peculiarities of the water bodies of the region by local executive 
bodies in establishing the rules for using them;  
       4) integrity in wastes disposal;  
       5) protection of the basin of the water body from water and wind erosion, 
desertification, waterlogging, secondary salinization, pollution from industrial and 
domestic wastes and other substances;  
       6) reclamation of the disturbed water bodies and lands of water resources;  
       7) priority of environmental and sanitary water releases on the beds of the water 
bodies to economic entities.  
      Footnote. Article 128 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 20 December, 2004 No 13.  
 
Article 129. Requirements to economic activities in the water bodies area of the 
special state significance  
       In order to protect the water bodies of the special national importance, a special 
regime of economic activity shall be set there, which provides:  
      1) priority of activities, aimed at preservation and improvement of sanitary-
epidemiological and environmental situation; 
       2) continuous reduction of impact of economic activities on the ecological system 
of the water bodies;  
       3) balanceness of social and economic tasks and protection of water bodies of the 
special national significance on the sustainable development principles.  
Article 130. The activities, prohibited in the water bodies of the special state 
significance  
       In the water bodies of the special national significance the following actions shall 
be prohibited:  
       1) economic and other activity, destructing the natural ecological systems of the 
basin, changing of the environment, that are dangerous to life and health of the 
population;  
       2) importation, storage or disposal of radioactive waste and products, that may not 
be neutralized, into the water bodies of the special national significance;  
       3) reed mowing and burning of dry greenery, uprooting of the forest, development 
of river channels that are of spawning value;  
      4) economic activity and production on the territory of works and services without 
mandatory sanitary and epidemiological examination. 


--- PAGE 112 ---

      Footnote. Article 130 as amended by the Law of the RK dated 02.01.2021 № 401-
VI (shall enter into force from 01.07.2021). 
 
Article 131. The state participation in regulation of economic activities in the 
water bodies of special national significance  
       1. In order to preserve and rehabilitate the ecological system of the water bodies 
of special national significance, the central and local executive bodies of oblasts, cities 
of republican significance, the capital take into account the particularities of the zone 
when developing the river basin schemes for integrated use and protection of water 
bodies.  
       2. In order to coordinate the activities of the state bodies, public associations and 
business entities at the national level, the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
may establish a National Coordination Council.  
      Footnote. Article 131, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see 
Art. 2); dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication)  
 
 Section 9. Economic regulation mechanism for use and protection of water resources, water supply and 
wastewater disposal  
       Footnote. The title of Section 9, as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 Chapter 28. Economic leverages for water use regulation  
Article 132. The types of economic regulation in use and protection of water 
resources, water supply and wastewater disposal  
       The main types of economic regulation shall be as follows:  
       1) charging the water users with the fees and charges, provided by the tax 
legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       2) development of the documents of the state planning System of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, providing the rational use and protection of water resources, water supply 
and wastewater disposal in settlements;  
       3) in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, provision of 
credit and other benefits to the individual and legal entities, introducing and 
developing resource-saving, low-waste technologies and non-traditional energy forms, 
taking other effective measures for protection and rational use of water resources, 
water supply and wastewater disposal;  
       4) creation of public funds and their involvement in rehabilitation and protection 
of water bodies.  


--- PAGE 113 ---

      Footnote. Article 132, as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2); dated 03.07.2013 
No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication).  
 
Article 133. Fee for water use  
       1. General water use in the Republic of Kazakhstan is free of charge.  
       2. Special water use in the Republic of Kazakhstan is on a fee paid basis in 
accordance with the tax legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
Article 134. Payment for water services to water users, water supply, wastewater 
disposal  
       1. The services, related to water supply to water users, water supply, wastewater 
disposal, rehabilitation and reconstruction works and other water activities shall be 
carried out on a fee paid basis.  
      2. The tariffs for water supply services to water users, water supply and water 
discharge shall be approved in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan on natural monopolies. 
       3. The procedure and conditions of charging for water services shall be 
determined by the agreements of the parties.  
      Footnote. Article 134, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 07.07.2006 No 174; dated 29.12.2008 No 116-IV (shall be enforced from 
01.01.2009); dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2; dated 
11.07.2017 № 89-VI (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first 
official publication). 
 
Article 135. Types of state support to water economy, water supply and water 
discharge and principals of investment policy for rational use and protection of 
water fund 
      Footnote. Title of Article 135 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar 
days after its first official publication). 
       1. The main types of the state support for water economy, water supply and water 
discharge shall be:  
       1) maintenance of the state institutions of water management system;  
       2) funding of the expenditures for trans-boundary water facilities and water 
facilities of the national significance, not related to the water supply;  
       3) funding of restoration of very emergency water facilities and hydro-reclamation 
systems;  


--- PAGE 114 ---

       4) attraction of funds, including loans for construction of new and reconstruction 
of the existing water facilities and hydro-reclamation systems;  
      5) subsidizing the cost of drinking water supply services from particularly 
important group and local water supply systems, which shall be non-alternative 
sources of drinking water supply, according to lists approved respectively by the 
authorized body or local executive bodies of the regions; 
       5-1) subsidizing of construction, reconstruction and modernization of water 
supply and water discharge systems on a grant and non-refundable basis, carried out at 
the expense of budget;  
       6) provision of benefit and long-term loans and other preferences to the water 
economy subjects, organizations for water supply and water discharge in the order, 
defined by the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       7) funding of the measures for safety of water systems and facilities, owned by the 
state;  
      8) is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 13.06.2013 No 
102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication).  
 
       2. The basic principles of investment policy for the rational use and protection of 
water resources, irrigated land reclamation, safety of water management systems and 
facilities shall be as follows:  
       1) the state support for water sector’ development at the expense of the centralized 
investment on the return basis;  
       2) stimulation of own sources of organizations for using them in investment water 
management activities;  
       3) expansion of attraction of loans, including under the state guarantees;  
       4) the state control over disbursement of the budget funds, allocated for 
investment.  
       3. The state support for water management and investment policy for the rational 
use and protection of water resources, as well as elimination of not exploited and 
unsalvageable water supply systems and facilities, that are the state-owned, are 
conducted in accordance with the legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 135, as amended by the Laws of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
dated 20.12.2004 No 13; dated 10.01.2006 No 116 (the order of enforcement see Art. 
2 of the Law No 116); dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see art. 
2); dated 13.06.2013 No 102-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days 
after its first official publication); dated 29.09.2014 № 239-V (shall be enforced upon 
expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication); dated 15.06.2015 № 


--- PAGE 115 ---

322-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official 
publication); dated 25.01.2021 № 411-VI (shall enter into force upon the expiry of ten 
calendar days after the day of the first official publication).  
 
Article 135-1. Subsidizing of construction, reconstruction and modernization of 
water supply and water discharge systems 
      1. Subsidizing of construction, reconstruction and modernization of water supply 
and water discharge systems shall be carried out as an economic incentive for the 
development of water supply and water discharge. 
      2. Subsidizing of construction, reconstruction and modernization of water supply 
and water discharge systems shall be carried out in the following areas: 
      1) technical support of projects, which includes the development of technical 
feasibility, design and estimate documentation, implementation of technical and 
architectural supervision; 
      2) capital-intensive expenses, including the expenses for construction and 
installation work, purchase of equipment and materials. 
      Footnote. Chapter 28 is supplemented by Article 135-1 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 15.06.2015 № 322-V (shall be enforced 
upon expiry of ten calendar days after its first official publication). 
 
Article 136. Insurance in the use of and protection of water resources 
       1. Insurance in the use and protection of water resources is a complex of relations, 
aimed at protection of property interests of individual and legal entities, upon the 
occurrence of the risk of liability for obligations, arising from the contract due to the 
damaging the objects of the water relationships, life, health and property of others.  
       2. Voluntary insurance shall be carried out by individual and legal entities in view 
of their willingness. Types, conditions and procedure for voluntary insurance in the 
use and protection of water resources shall be defined by the agreements, signed 
between the insurer and the insuree.  
 Section 10. Water disputes and responsibility for violation of the water legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan  
Chapter 29. Settlement of water disputes 
Article 137. Water disputes 
       1. Water disputes are the disputes, arising between the subjects of water relations 
on the use and protection of water bodies, water facilities and water parting.  
       2. Water disputes between the subjects of water relations are resolved through 
negotiations between the parties, their consideration in the bodies, established by the 


--- PAGE 116 ---

associations of water users, in local executive bodies of the oblast (town of republican 
status, the capital) and the authorized body or in the courts.  
      Footnote. Article 137 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 20 December, 2004 No 13.  
 
Article 138. Return of illegally occupied water bodies and water facilities  
       Illegally occupied water bodies and water facilities are returned to their owners 
with compensation for damage, caused by violation of the water legislation of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan during their illegal use. Return of the illegally occupied water 
facilities shall be made in the order, prescribed by the Law s of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan.  
 Chapter 30. Liability for violation of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan  
Article 139. Infringement in the use and protection of water resources  
       Footnote. The Article is excluded by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
Article 140. Responsibility for violation of the water legislation of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan  
       Violation of the water legislation of the Republic of Kazakhstan entails liability in 
accordance with the Law s of the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
      Footnote. Article 140 as revised by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 
12.02.2009 No 132-IV (the order of enforcement see Art. 2).  
 
 Section 11. International cooperation in the use and protection of trans-boundary waters  
Chapter 31. Use and protection of trans-boundary waters  
Article 141. The main directions of international cooperation in protection of 
trans-boundary waters  
       The main directions of international cooperation in the use and protection of trans-
boundary waters shall be:  
       1) protection of the interests of the Republic of Kazakhstan in the use and 
protection of trans-boundary waters on the basis of conclusion of international 
agreements;  
       2) fulfillment of obligations of the Republic of Kazakhstan under the international 
treaties, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       3) harmonization of water legislations of the bordering countries in the part of 
inter-state relations for trans-boundary waters;  
       4) scientific and technical cooperation, joint development and implementation of 
programs, regulations, standards, projects, and monitoring of the use and protection of 
trans-boundary waters.  


--- PAGE 117 ---

      Footnote. Article 141 as amended by the Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 
dated 03.07.2013 No 124-V (shall be enforced upon expiry of ten calendar days after 
its first official publication).  
 
Article 142. Principles of international cooperation in the use and protection of 
trans-boundary waters  
       The Republic of Kazakhstan in its policy in the use and protection of trans-
boundary waters shall have the following principles:  
       1) environmental, sanitary and epidemiological safety and development of 
international environmental cooperation;  
       2) to ensure the rights of all countries of trans-boundary watercourses to fair, 
reasonable and mutually beneficial water use in accordance with the generally 
recognized principles and norms of the international water Law;  
       3) water resources management, taking into account the needs of the present 
generation without detriment to the needs of future generations;  
       4) balance of environmental rights, interests, rights and needs of economic 
development of water systems of trans-boundary river basins;  
       5) mutual and peaceful settlement of disputes in addressing the use and protection 
of trans-boundary waters;  
       6) organization of measures to prevent potential cross-border impacts on the trans-
boundary waters’ status;  
       7) international liability and compensation for damage, caused by the trans-
boundary effects.  
Article 143. Mechanism of inter-state cooperation in the use and protection of 
trans-boundary waters  
       The mechanism of inter-state cooperation in the use and protection of trans-
boundary waters shall provide for:  
       1) reasonable and equitable use of trans-boundary waters, taking into account their 
cross-border origin in activities, that have or are likely to have trans boundary impact;  
       2) the use of trans-boundary waters on the basis of their environmentally sound 
and rational management, conservation and protection of the environment;  
       3) the measures on suppression, prevention, restriction and reduction of pollution 
of trans-boundary waters, which should not pollute other parts of the environment;  
       4) maintenance and, if necessary, rehabilitation of ecosystems, disturbed by trans-
boundary effects;  
       5) establishment of the maximum permissible discharge of effluents, strict water 
conservation standards, complying with the modern technical achievements and 
economically feasible conditions of water use;  


--- PAGE 118 ---

       6) development and coordination of programs for monitoring of trans-boundary 
waters and water bodies and involvement in their implementation;  
       7) joint financial and technical participation in management, regulation and 
protection of trans-boundary waters;  
       8) exchange of information on the water situation in trans-boundary river basins, 
prompt notification and mutual assistance in water emergency situations;  
       9) cooperation with neighboring countries in harmonization of the legal 
framework, 
creation 
of 
common 
monitoring 
systems, 
development 
and 
implementation of joint programs for protection and rehabilitation of trans-boundary 
waters and the related environmental systems, attraction of international 
organizations’ funds for the purposes;  
      10) development, coordination and implementation of measures for joint 
exploitation of trans-boundary waters and water facilities; 
       11) if necessary, to establish an inter-state body for management of trans-
boundary waters for joint implementation of inter-state and inter-governmental 
agreements on the use and protection of trans-boundary waters, ratified by the 
Republic of Kazakhstan;  
       12) establishment of a regional and national database for the use and protection of 
trans-boundary waters;  
       13) conduction of joint scientific and technological research to resolve water 
problems;  
       14) any other activity, related to the use and protection of trans-boundary waters.  
Article 144. Economic grounds for international cooperation in use and 
protection of trans-boundary waters  
       The economic grounds for international cooperation in the use and protection of 
trans-boundary waters shall provide:  
       1) effective and rational use of trans-boundary waters in order to keep, rehabilitate 
and maintain biological balance in this water body and the surrounding area;  
       2) compensation liability for damage, caused by the guilty party, in the result of 
trans-boundary impact;  
       3) reimbursement of costs to the state, carrying out the one-way operation of 
water facilities for management, regulation and protection of trans-boundary waters, 
used by other states, on the equity participation principle in the use of water resources;  
       4) on a compensation base, to provide a share (part thereof) of trans-boundary 
waters of one state to another state, specified by the relevant ratified international 
treaties.  


--- PAGE 119 ---

Article 145. Adjustment of disputes on the use and protection of trans-boundary 
waters  
       1. The disputes on the use and protection of trans-boundary waters between the 
Republic of Kazakhstan and other states are settled on the principle of goodwill, 
mutual respect and good neighborly relations, through negotiation or other ways, 
acceptable to the parties, involved in the disputes.  
       2. If it is impossible to achieve the mutually acceptable solutions in the 
negotiations, it is advised to use arbitral procedure to resolve the water disputes, unless 
otherwise provided by the relevant international agreements on the use and protection 
of trans-boundary waters, ratified by the Republic of Kazakhstan.  
 Chapter 32. Final and transitional provisions  
       Footnote. The title of Chapter 32 as amended by the Law of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV.  
Article 145-1. Transitional provisions 
       The provisions of subparagraph 2) of paragraph 1 of Article 125 of this Code shall 
not be applied to the operation of buildings and facilities, constructed within the 
boundaries of water protection zones until 1 July, 2009. At that, their operation shall 
be allowed only if there is an organized centralized waste-water disposal system, other 
drainage and waste-water treatment systems or a water-proof cesspool, which is 
regularly treated.  
      Footnote. The Code was supplemented by Article 145-1 in accordance with the 
Law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, dated 10.07.2009 No 180-IV.  
 
Article 146. The order of implementation of this Code  
       1. This Code enters into force on the day of its official publication.  
       2. Is repealed:  
       The Water Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 31 March, 1993 (Bulletin of 
the Supreme Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 1993, No 7, Art. 149; Bulletin of 
the Parliament of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 1996, No 22, art. 408, 1999, No 11, Art. 
357, 2001, No 3, Art. 20; No 24, art. 338);  
       Resolution of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan dated 31 March 
1993 "On implementation of the Water Code of the Republic of Kazakhstan" (Bulletin 
of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan, 1993, No 7, Art. 150).  
The President 
of the Republic of Kazakhstan 
 
 
 
