www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comoros

Water Code

Law No. 94-037 of 21 December 1994

[NB - Law No. 94-037 of 21 December 1994 on the Water Code]

Title 1 - Natural Waters

Fresh water, a renewable natural resource, is part of the national heritage for which the State is responsible to the community.

The State shall establish the rules governing the right to use and dispose of water.

This Code must comply with the regulatory texts in force relating to the national environmental policy.

Chapter 1 - Rainwater and Springs

Art.1.- Rainwater and springs

1) Collection of rainwater

Whoever collects and retains rainwater has a right of personal use of this water, in compliance with hygiene and public order conditions.

2) Easement for runoff

The lower land is subject to a natural easement for the runoff of rainwater falling on the upper land and of spring water originating on that land.

If the use of this water or the purpose for which it is intended aggravates the said easement, compensation is due to the owner of the lower land.

3) Public interest restrictions on the use of spring water

The owner of a spring may not use it in such a way as to deprive the inhabitants of a neighboring locality of the water that is necessary for them.

Water Code
1/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

If, upon exiting the land where they arise, the spring waters form a watercourse having the character of public and flowing waters, the owner may not divert them from their natural course to the detriment of users located downstream.

Chapter 2 - Watercourses, Groundwater

Art.2.- Public domain

Watercourses are part of the public domain, except in sections declassified by decree.

The same applies to their diversions and the reservoirs of their waters established to ensure the satisfaction of water needs for agriculture and industry, food supply, as well as irrigation canals.

1) Conservation of the public domain

The public domain is inalienable.

No work may be executed, and no water intake may be practiced on the public domain without the authorization of the concerned administration.

The discharge of effluents and wastewater into watercourses is regulated by the supervising authority.

2) Management of the public domain

The management of watercourses is ensured by the Ministry in charge of energy, in collaboration with the Ministry of Rural Development.

3) Groundwater

Groundwater in deep aquifers is subject to a special protection regime.

No one may execute a well or drilling intended for the abstraction of groundwater without prior authorization.

When, through drilling or underground works, an owner causes water to emerge on their land, the owners of the lower lands must receive it, but they are entitled to compensation in the event of damages resulting from its flow.

Title 2 - Drinking Water Supply

Chapter 3 - Quality of Supply Water

Art.3.- General provisions

Water Code
2/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

All water supplied for human consumption must be potable. It fulfills this condition when it is not likely to be detrimental to the health of those who consume it.

The following are considered waters intended for human consumption:

waters supplied for consumption, whether packaged or not, including natural mineral waters, which are otherwise regulated;

waters used in food businesses for the purposes of manufacturing, processing, preserving products or substances and which cannot affect the wholesomeness of the final food product;

food-grade ice of water origin.

Anyone who offers water to the public for human consumption, whether for a fee or free of charge and in any form whatsoever, is required to ensure that this water is fit for consumption.

Even if deemed naturally pure and potable based on the environment from which it is drawn, water from the public distribution system must be subject to constant sanitary control and adequate treatment.

Art.3.1.- Bacteriological and clinical characteristics

For water to be considered potable and to be distributable to a community, it must satisfy the following conditions:

not contain parasitic or pathogenic organisms;

not contain, in treated or untreated water, Escherichia coli (in 100 ml of water) or fecal streptococci (in 50 ml of water). The presence of a small number of sulfite-reducing clostridia is tolerable in treated water and does not in itself imply that the water is non-potable;

not exhibit a coloration exceeding 20 units (platinum-cobalt colorimetric scale) or a turbidity exceeding 15 drops of alcoholic mastic gum solution at 1/1,000. During normal operation and for a limited period, it may be tolerated up to 30 drops of mastic (in 40 milliliters of optically clear water);

not have a clogging potential due to suspended elements greater than 0.1 and not contain algae or other visible elements;

not show chemical signs of pollution or concentrations of toxic or undesirable substances higher than those set in the table below:

Limit concentrations (in milligrams per liter): Lead (Pb) 0.1, Selenium (Se) 0.05, Fluoride (F) 1.0, Arsenic (As) 0.05

Hexavalent chromium: Dose lower than the analytical detection limit

Copper (Cu) 1.0, Iron (Fe) 0.2, Manganese (Mn) 0.1, Zinc (Zn) 5.0, Phenolic compounds (as phenol) nil

the total mineralization must not exceed 2 g per liter;

the water must not exhibit radioactivity higher than that defined by WHO recommendations. Furthermore, the water must not have any unpleasant odor or taste.

it is also recommended that the concentration of certain elements not exceed the following levels:

Magnesium (as Mg) 125 mg/l

Chloride (as Cl) 250 mg/l

Water Code
3/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

Sulfate (as SO4) 250 mg/l

Nitrate (as NO3) 44 mg/l

Chapter 4 - Abstractions

Art.4.- Abstraction points and protection perimeters

An abstraction point is an intake, a borehole, a spring, a well field, or a surface water intake.

Several abstractions (or several boreholes...) close to each other, operated by the same service and for which the protection measures are common, constitute a single abstraction point.

Art.4.1.- Protection of abstraction points

The protection of abstraction points for water intended for human consumption, which falls under the application of the Public Health Code, is distinct from the more general protection provided for groundwater by regulations concerning discharges, jets, flows, direct or indirect deposits of water or materials. It is, in fact, a complementary protection whose purpose is to preserve the abstraction points from the risks of pollution originating from activities carried out nearby.

This particular protection is achieved by establishing protection perimeters defined for a maximum abstraction flow rate and intended to obstruct polluting elements likely to significantly alter the quality of the water. Within these perimeters, certain activities may be prohibited or regulated.

The diversity of hydrological and hydrogeological contexts and, consequently, of the phenomena of transfer and degradation of polluting substances, leads to distinguishing, on the one hand, the protection of groundwater abstractions and springs, and on the other hand, that of surface runoff water abstractions in compact rocks presenting open fractures (crystalline, sandstone, and especially limestone rocks).

Art.4.2.- Protection of groundwater abstractions and springs

The protection of abstraction points for water intended for human consumption is achieved by establishing two perimeters, one for immediate protection, the other for close protection, possibly supplemented by a third perimeter, known as the distant protection perimeter.

1) Immediate protection perimeter

The immediate protection perimeter is intended to prevent the deterioration of the abstraction works and to avoid spills or infiltrations of polluting substances occurring within or in the immediate vicinity of the abstraction point.

Given the general increase in pollution risks, a minimum radius of 50 m must be preserved around the abstraction point.

Water Code
4/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

2) Close protection perimeter

The close protection perimeter must effectively protect the abstraction point against the underground migration of polluting substances.

Its extent is determined by taking into account, in particular:

the duration and speed of water transfer between the potential points of pollution emission and the abstraction point in the aquifer,

the fixation and degradation capacity of the soil and subsoil with regard to pollutants,

the dispersion capacity of the groundwater.

3) Distant protection perimeter

The distant protection perimeter will eventually protect the preceding one to reinforce protection against permanent or diffuse pollution. It will be created if it is considered that the application of general regulations, even reinforced, is not sufficient, particularly if there is a potential risk of pollution that the nature of the traversed underground formations does not allow to be reduced with complete safety, despite the distance from the abstraction point.

Art.5.- Protection of surface water abstractions

For abstractions from surface waters (watercourses, reservoirs, etc.), the delimitation of protection perimeters defined by the Public Health Code is mandatory; the procedure for establishing these perimeters is completely identical to that described above.

However, given the transfer speeds sometimes involved in the event of an accidental or non-accidental spill, the security of the water supply is essentially ensured by:

the existence of water treatment equipment adapted to the characteristics of the raw water and capable of absorbing variations in these characteristics;

the development of a preventive action focusing on the inventory and analysis of accidental pollution risks as well as on their reduction;

the establishment of a continuous surveillance and alert system as well as an intervention plan.

It is clear, however, that security and supply will be better assured if the community has a diversified supply that allows it to call upon resources of satisfactory quality in the event of an accident.

The definition of protection perimeters has the following objectives:

to ensure effective material protection of the abstraction point, particularly against any direct discharge or jet into the zone directly influenced by the water pumping, this zone being identifiable with that of the immediate protection perimeter;

to define, in the vicinity of the abstraction point, a close protection perimeter where all discharges of wastewater, all deposits of polluting materials, and all causes of diffuse pollution, particularly by runoff, must be prohibited, suppressed, or specifically regulated; furthermore, all works for the collection and treatment of wastewater and for the evacuation of treated effluents will be prohibited. The aim is thus to avoid degrading the quality of the raw water for which the treatment plant was designed.

Water Code
5/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

The creation of a distant protection perimeter appears only rarely necessary. It seems much more judicious to intervene within the framework of a quality objectives policy, over the whole or part of the catchment basin.

To guarantee the presence of watercourses, the protection of surface waters must be supported by a forest protection policy.

Art.5.1.- Case of abstraction in a watercourse

The immediate protection perimeter must prohibit all access to the intake at the treatment plant. If the plant is not built directly on the bank of the watercourse, two separate perimeters must be provided.

In addition to the area adjacent to the water intake, the immediate protection perimeter may include a portion of the watercourse, the boundaries of which are then marked to prevent bathing and washing.

The close protection perimeter and, where applicable, the distant protection perimeter may extend along each of the banks of the watercourse upstream, their dimensions being notably a function of the ratio of the abstracted flow to the low-water flow and of pollution risks (wastewater, runoff from accidental spills from the road network, etc.).

Art.5.2.- Water quality monitoring network

Within the protection perimeters, special monitoring measures can be established both to follow the evolution of groundwater quality by setting up a monitoring network, and to evaluate the quality of wastewater discharges that may be the source of dangerous pollution.

The groundwater quality monitoring network is based on different observation points in the aquifer where water samples are taken periodically. Continuous monitoring of the total mineralization rate will be carried out by installing a measuring device (conductivimeter) at the bottom of the well or in its vicinity.

The analyses of the samples focus on parameters chosen according to the existence of a particular risk for which it appears necessary to follow the evolution (nitrates for example) or to evaluate the effectiveness of the protection put in place. The search for pesticides can be part of a program; it remains subject to prior knowledge of the products used nearby.

Chapter 5 - Drinking Water Distribution

Art.6.- Common provisions

Water conveyance through open-air channels for human consumption is prohibited, with the exception of those that have been the subject of development works ensuring that the water delivered is fit for consumption.

Water Code
6/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

The use of water drawn from the natural environment for human consumption is authorized by a joint order of the Minister of Health and the Minister in charge of water.

A joint order of the Minister of Health and the Minister in charge of water will determine the procedures according to which the authorization request will be established and processed and will indicate the technically appropriate treatment processes and products to which it may appeal.

The use of water drawn from the natural environment for the personal use of a family is not subject to the authorization procedure provided for in the second paragraph.

Art.6.1.- Private distribution

The bottling of water intended for public consumption as well as the abstraction and distribution of water for human consumption through a private supply network are subject to the authorization of the Minister of Health and the Minister in charge of water.

A decree in the Council of Ministers will determine the application procedures for the provisions of this chapter, including those for monitoring their execution, as well as the conditions under which the persons or companies covered by the said provisions will have to reimburse the costs of this monitoring and those under which the authorization may be suspended or withdrawn.

Art.6.2.- Public distribution

Any public distributor of drinking water is required, under the conditions fixed by a public administration regulation, to have the quality of the water that is the subject of this distribution verified.

The correction methods to be eventually implemented must be approved by the Minister of Public Health and Population.

The same obligations apply to communities with regard to wells, springs, underground or surface aquifers, or watercourses serving for the collective supply of inhabitants.

In case of non-observance by a distributor of the obligations set out in this article, the Minister in charge of Health, after a formal notice has remained without result, shall take the necessary measures. These measures shall be carried out at the expense of the distributors or the communities.

Art.6.3.- Declaration of public utility

In order to ensure the protection of water quality, the act declaring the public utility of water abstraction works intended for the supply of human communities shall determine, around the abstraction point, in full ownership, a close protection perimeter within which are prohibited or regulated all activities and all deposits or installations likely to harm the quality of the water directly or indirectly, and, where applicable, a distant protection perimeter within which the above-mentioned activities, installations and deposits may be regulated.

A decree in the Council of Ministers will determine the conditions for the application of the preceding paragraph.

Water Code
7/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

The act declaring the public utility of water abstraction works intended for the supply of human communities shall determine, with regard to activities, deposits, and installations existing at the date of its publication, the time limits within which the conditions provided for in this article must be met.

Acts declaring public utility may, under the same conditions, determine the protection perimeters around existing abstraction points, as well as around free-flowing adduction works and buried reservoirs.

Art.6.4.- Expropriation indemnities

The indemnities that may be due to the owners or occupants of lands included in a protection perimeter for water abstraction intended for the supply of human communities, following measures taken to ensure the protection of this water, are fixed according to the rules applicable in matters of expropriation for reasons of public utility.

Art.6.5.- Quality requirements

Before being made available to the user, waters intended for human consumption must meet the quality requirements defined in this law. Furthermore, they must not show any sign of deterioration in their quality.

Art.6.6.- Sanitary control

The quality control of water during its operation is carried out by the distributor under the supervision of the competent services of the ministry in charge of public health. The analyses are carried out by an independent, legally recognized laboratory.

Treatment products must conform to WHO standards and be accompanied by a certificate of origin.

The Minister of Health shall have the right to prohibit the use of certain products deemed harmful.

Title 3 - Public Water Service Regime

Chapter 6 - Characteristics of the public service

Art.7.- Object of the public service

The object of the public water service is the abstraction, adduction, and distribution of drinking water which, when combined within the same perimeter into an operating unit, form a public distribution system.

Chapter 7 - Management of the public service

Art.8.- Management of the public service

Water Code
8/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

Art.8.1.- Management structure

The State entrusts the management of the public water service to the EEDC.

In this capacity, the EEDC operates the large and medium adduction networks throughout the national territory. It develops and implements programs and projects for the reinforcement and extension of these networks as well as programs and projects for the supply of urban centers.

Art.8.2.- Operation of works belonging to third parties

At the request of local authorities or by exercising the preferential right attached to its public service mission, the company may take over the operation of a public distribution system created outside of its intervention and this under the same conditions as its own installations, provided that this does not result in abnormal constraints and exceptional costs likely to harm its financial equilibrium.

Small semi-urban and rural adductions are the responsibility of the Minister in charge of production.

Title 4 - Management of Water Resources

Chapter 8 - Works on watercourses

Art.9.- Water intake, diversion, and dam works

The establishment of water intakes, diversions, and dams on watercourses for the purpose of, in particular, domestic or industrial supply and irrigation, must be the subject of an authorization request addressed to the Minister in charge of water resources, providing all information on the characteristics of the proposed development, its justifications, its financing methods, and its operation.

The granted authorization shall specify, in particular, the characteristics of the work, the conditions for the execution of the works, the maximum flow rate to be used, and the reserved flow rate downstream, as well as, eventually, the operating conditions.

Existing works are subject to a declaration of their characteristics to the competent authorities within six months following the publication of this Code.

Art.9.1.- Use of hydraulic energy

No one may dispose of the energy of a watercourse without an authorization from the State.

Dams, reservoirs, and hydraulic plants are authorized, whatever their power, by a decree issued in the Council of Ministers, on the proposal of the Minister in charge of equipment and energy.

Water Code
9/10

www.Droit-Afrique.com
Comores

The duration of authorizations may not exceed fifty years. At any time, they may be revoked or modified without indemnity.

In the five years preceding their expiration, they may be renewed for a period of thirty years. A right of preference belongs to the licensee whose title is about to expire.

The renewal takes place automatically for the said duration of thirty years if the administration does not notify a contrary decision before the beginning of the last year.

If the authorization is not renewed, the licensee is required to re-establish the free flow of the watercourse; however, the State has the right to demand the abandonment, for its benefit, of the dam and water intake works built in the bed of the watercourse and on its dams, all with indemnity.

Water Code
10/10