

--- PAGE 1 ---

THE LAW OF THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC #8 from Jan 12 2005 
 
WATER CODE OF THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 
 
Chapter 1 – General provisions 
Chapter 2 – Competence of state bodies in water resources management 
Chapter 3 – Water resources monitoring and planning 
Chapter 4 – The abstraction and use of water resources 
Chapter 5 – Use of water on the base of water supply contracts 
Chapter 6 – Use and development of underground waters 
Chapter 7 – Drinking water supply 
Chapter 8 – Economic mechanisms of water use 
Chapter 9 – Protection of water resources from pollution and depletion 
Chapter 10 – Protection zones 
Chapter 11 – Emergency situations 
Chapter 12 – Dam safety 
Chapter 13 – Irrigation and other water economy activity 
Chapter 14 – The ownership and use of water economy constructions and lands of the water 
fund 
Chapter 15 – State water inspectorate 
Chapter 16 – Responsibility for violence of the water legislation in Kyrgyz Republic 
Chapter 17 – The single water information system 
Chapter 18 – Interstate cooperation in sphere of water relations. 
Chapter 19 – Final provisions 
CHAPTER ONE – GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 1 Objective and tasks 
 
1. This Code shall regulate water relations in the field of use, protection and development of 
water resources for guaranteed, adequate and safe supply of water for the population of 
the Kyrgyz Republic, protection of the environment and promotion of the rational 
development of the water fund of the country. 
  
2. In fulfilment of its objective, this Code shall establish principles for the management of 
water resources; the base of the state water policy shall be identified; the competences of 
state bodies concerning water resources and water object management shall be 
established; the system of measures for development of National water strategy and plans 
on use of water resources shall be created; the use of surface, underground waters and 
payment for their use shall be regulated; the measures on protection of water resources 
from pollution and depletion shall be identified; the provisions on emergency situations 
that belong to water resources and dam safety  shall be introduced; water economy and 
irrigation sectors shall be regulated; provisions on use and ownership of water fund lands 
shall be established; the establishment of the State Water Inspectorate and obligations of 
the state water inspectors shall be provided; violations of the law within water resource 
use shall be identified; the attitude of this Code to the obligations of the Kyrgyz Republic 
concerning international law shall be identified. 
 
Article 2 The main terms and definitions used in this code 
 
The terms and definitions used in this Code mean: 
 


--- PAGE 2 ---

 2
‘Water users’ association’ – public union established for supply of agricultural producers by 
irrigated water;  
‘Basin water administration’ - a territorial branch (body) of the state water administration that 
is responsible for the management of water resources within the hydro-geographic boundaries 
of a principal basin;  
‘Basin Plan’ - Plan for the Development, Use and Protection of Water Resources within a 
specified Principal Basin; 
‘Basin Council’ - a representative body for solving issues on use protection and development 
of water resources within a Principal Basin;  
‘Banks’ - strips of land alongside a natural water body that is included within the lands of the 
water fund; 
Water users – legal or physical entities of the Kyrgyz Republic and foreign legal and physical 
entities including persons without citizenship. 
‘Water bodies’ - any concentration of surface and underground water including rivers, 
streams, springs, lakes, swamps, glaciers and snowfields;  
‘Water resources of the Kyrgyz Republic’ - all waters found within the national bounders of 
the Kyrgyz Republic; 
‘Water economy constructions’ - water reservoirs with dams, canals, collectors, drains, 
ditches, hydro-technical constructions, embankments, aqueducts, mud flood ducts, bridges, 
wells, pump stations, water pipes with communications and other elements of infrastructure 
including all ancillary parcels of lands provided for their operation and maintenance;  
‘Water fund’ - the collection of water bodies, water resources and water economy 
constructions including the lands of the water fund; 
‘Principal Basin’ – an area in which surface water resources drain into a major common river 
or water body; 
‘State Water Administration’ - the specially established state body for the management of 
water resources in the Kyrgyz Republic;  
‘State Hydro Meteorology Body’ - the specially authorized state body participating in the 
development of the information system on water, monitoring of water resources and the state 
water cadastre;  
‘State Hydro-geological Body’ - the specially authorized state body participating in 
agreement of permissions on use of underground waters and drilling of water wells and 
issuing licenses on implementation of the professional activity on drilling. 
‘State Environmental Protection Body’ - the specially authorized state body on environmental 
protection; 
‘State Emergency Situations Body’ - the specially authorized state body participating in 
training, renewal and implementation of plans in case of floods, mud-floods and land slides. 
‘State Sanitarian and Epidemiological Body’ - the specially authorized state body providing 
identification of water appropriateness for economic, drinking and domestic water use, 
approval of standards of water in water bodies. 
Drainage systems – connected net of opened and/or closed collectors and drains, hydro-
technical constructions, wells of vertical drain and other infrastructure including all stripes of 
alienations of lands provided for operation and maintenance of drain systems. 
Annual agreement on water supply – the document certifying the right of the water user to 
identification of water volume for one year. 
‘Pollutant’ - any substance, energy or thing, or combination of these which has a harmful 
effect on human health, natural resources and ecosystems or which may cause damage to the 
environment; 
‘Lands of the water fund’ - lands occupied by reservoirs (rivers, lakes, water reservoirs, 
canals, drains), glaciers, swamps, hydro-technical and other water economy constructions and 
lands provided for easements; 


--- PAGE 3 ---

 3
‘Irrigation system’ - a network of irrigation and canals, pipes, hydro-technical equipment, 
pumping stations, wells, water reservoirs, ponds and tanks and associated electrical 
transmission lines, roads, buildings and other infrastructure and including all easements 
provided for operation and maintenance of irrigation systems. 
‘Water Supply Contract’ - a document that certifies the right of the water user to the fixed 
volume of water for the term up to 15 years.  
‘National Water Council’ - the state body that co-ordinates water relations in the Kyrgyz 
Republic and which is established by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic; 
‘Local state administration body’ mean an Oblast, a Rayon or a local state body of executive 
power; 
‘Waste’ - any substance or thing that the holder discards or intends or is required to discard, 
irrespective of its value, and any substance or thing deemed by regulations to be waste; 
Water supply service charge – the payment charged by the water supplier from the contract 
holder in accordance with the annual agreement on water supply. 
Charge for the use of water as a natural resource – charge established by the legislation of the 
Kyrgyz Republic; 
‘Dam’ - a hydro-technical construction that crosses the flow of water in a water body to 
increase the level of water behind the construction or to store water or to regulate the flow of 
water; 
‘Bulk Water Supplier’ - a territorial body of the State Water Administration or any other legal 
person that is responsible for the operation and maintenance of an irrigation system and which 
abstracts and conveys water for supply to a Water Users’ Association or another person on 
the basis of a Water Supply Contract;  
‘Water Use Permission’ - a permission issued for the term up to 15 years for the activity on 
water use and up to 5 years for implementation of the activity on extraction of gravel or other 
materials; 
‘Discharge Permission’ - a permission to discharge pollutants or wastes to water bodies or 
water economy constructions or lands of water fund; 
Servitude – the right of a person to the limited targeted use of a parcel of land owned or 
utilized by another person. 
‘Special Water Use Permission’ - a long-term permission issued by the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic;  
‘Ecological flow’ – minimum permissible water flow in water body that allows to save water 
ecosystem without coursing serious damage. 
‘Works on water resource protection’ means works with the purpose to: 
prevention or decrease of discharge of pollutants or wastes into water bodies, water economy 
constructions or lands of water fund; 
removal or placing of wastes and pollutants; 
treatment and alleviation of pollution cause by pollutants or wastes in the water body, water 
economy construction or lands of water fund; 
recovery of the condition of water body, water economy construction or lands of water fund 
including conservation of flora and fauna that have been before pollutants and wastes come 
into water body, water economy construction or lands of water fund if it is acceptably and 
practically. 
‘Responsible Person’ means the person that: 
discharged pollutants or wastes into water bodies, water economy constructions and lands of 
water fund; 
discharged pollutants or wastes to the places from which they, in accordance with the 
conclusions of the state environmental body may get into water body, water economy 
construction or lands of water fund. 
 


--- PAGE 4 ---

 4
Article 3. Water legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic 
 
1. Water relations in the Kyrgyz Republic are regulated by the Constitution of the Kyrgyz 
Republic, this Code and other normative legal acts approved in accordance therewith. 
 
2. Water law norms contained in other legal acts shall be consistent with this Code. 
 
3. In cases where provisions of other normative legal acts of the Kyrgyz Republic contradict 
the provisions of this Code, the provisions of this Code shall apply. 
 
Article 4. Ownership of water resources and the lands of the water fund 
 
1. The water resources of the Kyrgyz Republic are the exclusive and inalienable property of 
the State. Every person has the right to use water within the national borders in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code.  
 
2. The lands of the water fund occupied by water bodies and state owned water economy 
constructions and irrigation systems are the exclusive property of the State.  
 
Article 5. The management of water resources and the basin approach 
 
1. The management of water resources means the system of measures, norms and rules that 
provide for the rational use, development and protection of water resources and the 
environment in accordance with this Code and other normative and legal acts, as well as 
the protection of populated and industrial areas, human lives and property from the 
harmful effects of water.  
 
2. The basin approach means that the management of water resources is undertaken within 
the boundaries of the Principal Basin in accordance with hydrogeographic principles, 
which relate to Lake Issyk-Kul and the main rivers of the Kyrgyz Republic. The 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic on the proposal of the National Water Council 
establishes the zone of the activity of each basin water administration and basin council. 
The decision made shall be published in the open press. 
 
3. Within each Principal Basin the relevant Basin Water Administration and Basin Water 
Council, is responsible for specified aspects of water resource management in accordance 
with the provisions of this Code. 
 
4. Decisions of bodies of local state administration and the territorial branches of ministries, 
and administrative agencies are made in accordance with this article and the basin 
approach to water resources management. 
 
Article 6. Principles for the management of water resources 
 
The management of water resources is based on the following principles: 
 
- 
Participatory Principle – All interested stakeholders should participate in planning and 
decision-making processes;  
- 
Sustainability Principle – Decision making on the use and protection of water resources 
should take into account the needs of both present and future generations; 


--- PAGE 5 ---

 5
- 
Principle of the Economic Value of Water Resources – The economic value of water 
resources should be taken into account in the planning, decision making and realization of 
activity on the use and protection of water resources;   
- 
The Polluter Pays Principle – A person who pollutes water resources should pay for the 
discharge as for nature use; 
- 
The Precautionary Principle - The absence of full scientific information must not be used 
as a reason for postponing or failing to take effective action where there are risks of 
serious harm to water resources, the environment or human life; 
- 
Principles of real guarantees – Real guarantees are provided that respect the rights of 
water users and their legal defense; 
- 
Principle of Openness – Information on the condition and use of water bodies and water 
resources should be accessible to the public. 
 
CHAPTER TWO – COMPETENCE OF STATE BODIES IN WATER RESOURCES 
MANAGEMENT 
Article 7. Competence of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic in water resources 
management 
 
The competence of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic includes: 
 
- 
developing, approving and amending of water legislation; 
- 
ratifying and denouncement of international agreements in the sphere of water relations;  
- 
approving annual subsidies for irrigation and drainage; 
- 
setting charges for the use of water as a natural resource. 
 
Article 8. Competence of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in water resources 
management 
 
The competence of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic includes: 
 
- 
approval of the territorial boundaries of the Principal Basins in accordance with hydro-
geographic principles of water resource management; 
- 
establishment of the National Water Council; 
- 
approval of the regulations of the Basin Councils; 
- 
designates specially authorized state bodies for the purpose of implementing this Code; 
- 
establishment of the water resource monitoring system; 
- 
development and implementation of the state water economy programs, their investment 
and financing; 
- 
approval of Special Water Use Permissions; 
- 
performance of other tasks identified in this Code. 
 
Article 9. The National Water Council and its competence 
 
1. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic establishes the National Water Council for the 
solution of following tasks: 
 
- 
to coordinate the activities of ministries, administrative agencies, and other state bodies 
concerning the management of water resources, their use and protection; 
- 
to propose the hydro geographic boundaries of Principal Basins to the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic;  


--- PAGE 6 ---

 6
- 
to prepare the National Water Strategy for the approval of the President of the Kyrgyz 
Republic; 
- 
to prepare draft laws for presentation to the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic; 
- 
supervise the activities of the State Water Administration; 
- 
to develop regulations and instructions for the implementation of this Code; 
- 
to fulfill other tasks specified in this Code. 
 
2. The National Water Council comprises the heads of ministries, administrative agencies 
and other state bodies that are responsible for water resource management including 
financial and state security aspects. The composition of the Council is determined by the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
3. The Prime Minister of the Kyrgyz Republic chairs the National Water Council and the 
head of the State Water Administration is his deputy.  
 
4. The National Water Council meets at least once per year.  The activity of the National 
Water Council is regulated by a Regulation approved by the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic, this Code and other normative legal acts approved in accordance therewith. 
 
5. The National Water Council is entitled to obtain from other ministries, administrative 
agencies, other state bodies, and public structures, such information, data, reviews or 
technical and advisory support as are necessary to enable it to prepare the National Water 
Strategy and fulfil its tasks in accordance with this Code. 
 
6. The State Water Administration performs the function of secretariat to the National Water 
Council.  
 
Article 10. Basin Councils and their powers 
 
1. On the proposal of the State Water Administration, the National Water Council 
establishes a Basin Council for each Principal Basin where it considers this to be 
appropriate to improve co-ordination and water resource management. 
 
2. Each Basin Council includes representatives of the Basin Water Administration, territorial 
bodies of the State Environmental Protection Body, the State Emergency Situation Body, 
the State Hydro-meteorological Body, the State Hydrogeology Body, and the State 
Sanitary and Epidemiological Body working within that Principal Basin as well as 
representatives of Local State Administration Bodies, non-government organizations, and 
water users, including Water Users’ Associations. The Basin Council is chaired by the 
Head of Basin Water Administration for that Principal River Basin while the Basin 
Council members elect one of their members to be the Vice-Chairman. 
 
3. The tasks of Basin Councils are: 
 
- 
to develop the draft Basin Plans for submission to the National Water Council; 
- 
prepare draft rules of procedure of the Basin Council for approval by the Government of 
the Kyrgyz Republic; 
- 
to co-ordinate activities in the water sector within the Principal Basin; 
- 
approve the composition of the Basin and Local Irrigation and Drainage Committees; 
- 
to undertake other tasks specified in this Code. 
4. Each Basin Council meets at least once per year. Members of Basin Councils do not 
receive a salary. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

 7
 
5. The relevant Basin Water Administration performs the function of secretariat of the Basin 
Council. 
 
6. The activity of the Basin Councils is regulated by a Regulation approved by the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
Article 11. The State Water Administration and its competence 
 
1. The state body responsible for water resources management and the implementation of 
this Code is the State Water Administration. 
 
2. The competence of the State Water Administration includes: 
 
a) in the field of water resource management: 
 
- 
to provide the secretariat for the National Water Council; 
- 
to participate in Basin Councils; 
- 
to undertake monitoring and planning activities; 
- 
to manage and regulate the use of water resources; 
- 
to regulate the use of under ground waters; 
- 
to perform tasks relating to the protection of water resources from pollution and depletion; 
- 
to undertake tasks relating to the establishment and implementation of protection zones; 
- 
to undertake tasks relating to emergency situations; 
- 
to undertake tasks relating to dam safety; 
- 
to perform functions relating to the lands of the water fund; 
- 
to manage activity of the State Water Inspectorate; 
- 
to participate in the management of water resources information systems; 
- 
to undertake transitional measures in accordance with Chapter 18 of this Code;  
- 
to regulate water relations that are not competences of Jogorku Kenesh and the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic according to this Code. 
 
b) in the field of irrigation, drainage and other water economy activity: 
 
- 
operation, maintenance, repairing, rehabilitation, design and construction of irrigation, 
drainage systems and water economy constructions; 
- 
maintenance of irrigation, drainage systems and water economy constructions of interstate 
importance; 
- 
supply of water of fixed quality in accordance with contracts and annual concluded 
agreements on water supply;  
- 
collection of fee from the water users in accordance with contracts for water supply; 
- 
preparation of plans on operation and maintenance of each irrigation and drainage system 
for presentation to the corresponding irrigation commission; 
- 
passportization, maintain a cadastre on irrigation, drainage systems and water economy 
constructions and preparation of the proposals on increase of their technical level; 
- 
registration of volume of taken water from natural water bodies by the state irrigation 
systems and registration of the volume of water supply from it to water users; 
- 
management of state water fund lands assigned for operation and maintenance of the state 
irrigation and drainage systems; 
- 
development of target programs and projects with identification of the source of financing 
including foreign investments; 


--- PAGE 8 ---

 8
- 
planting of forestry protection plantations along of canals, collectors, around reservoirs 
and water economy constructions that are the state property and tree surgery; 
- 
preparation of state land-reclamation cadastre; 
- 
undertaking other tasks specified in this Code. 
 
3. The territorial branches of the State Water Administration are the Basin Water 
Administrations which are organized in accordance with hydro-geographic principle of 
basin territories of Principal Basins pursuant to article 5 of this Code and organizations on 
operation and maintenance of the state irrigation and drainage systems and/or water 
economy constructions. 
 
4. An annual report on the activities of the State Water Administration is approved by the 
National Water Council. 
 
5. The internal structure and activity of the State Water Administration is regulated by a 
Regulation approved by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
 
Article 12. The Authorized State Environmental Protection Body and its competence 
  
The competence of the Authorized State Environmental Protection Body with regard to the 
implementation of this Code includes: 
 
- 
to participate in the National Water Council and Basin Councils;  
- 
to participate in state monitoring;  
- 
to advise the State Water Administration on the issue of Water Use Permissions; 
- 
to advise on the proposed classification and standards of waters in water bodies and 
reservoirs; 
- 
to prepare and propose to the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic a list of hazardous 
substances that are prohibited for  discharge to water objects; 
- 
to issue Permissions on discharge of polluted subsidies and wastes into water objects, 
water economy constructions and water fund lands; 
- 
to suspend, cancel or vary of Permissions on discharge of polluted subsidies and wastes 
into water objects, water economy constructions and water fund lands; 
- 
to maintain a register of Permissions on discharge of polluted subsidies and wastes into 
water objects, water economy constructions and water fund lands; 
- 
to undertake water protection works; 
- 
to advise proposed minimum ecological flow; 
- 
to advise proposed mountain territories as zones of stock formation; 
- 
to agree proposals on the establishment of water protection zones. 
 
Article 13. The Authorized State Sanitarian and Epidemiological Body and its 
competence 
 
The competence of the Authorized State Sanitarian and Epidemiological Body with regard to 
the implementation of this Code includes: 
 
- 
to participate in National Water Council and Basin Council; 
- 
to advise on the proposed classification of waters and standards and objectives for such 
waters in accordance with article 49 of this Code; 
- 
to agree conditions of Permissions on discharge of polluted subsidies and wastes into 
water objects, water economy constructions and water fund lands; 


--- PAGE 9 ---

 9
- 
to develop sanitarian norms and rules of protection of surface and underground waters 
from pollution; 
- 
to identify surface water appropriateness for economic, drinking and domestic water use 
in accordance with sanitarian-hygienic norms; 
- 
to agree designs on zones of sanitarian protection of water objects for drinking and 
domestic water supply and medical purposes and rules on protection of underground and 
surface waters from pollution; 
- 
to agree conditions of discharge waste waters to the water objects; 
- 
to agree of order of control of water object quality above water discharge location and 
near the paces of water use provided by water user;  
- 
to perform other tasks specified in this Code. 
 
Article 14. The Authorized State Hydrogeology Body and its competence 
 
The competence of the Authorized State Hydrogeology Body with regard to the 
implementation of this Code includes: 
 
- 
to participate in National Water Council and Basin Council; 
- 
to advise on the issue of Water User Permissions and Special Water Use Permissions; 
- 
to agree of water well drilling permissions; 
- 
to issue well drillers licenses; 
- 
to propose regulations and guidelines on the protection of underground water from 
pollution; 
- 
to propose the creation of Groundwater Protection Zones; and 
- 
to perform other tasks specified in this Code. 
 
Article 15. The Authorized State Emergency Situations Body and the Authorized State 
Hydrometeorology Body  
 
1. The competence of the Authorized State Emergency Situations Body with regard to the 
implementation of this Code are: 
 
- 
to participate in the National Water Council and Basin Council; 
- 
to agree proposals on establishment of National Flood, Mud Flood, and Drought 
Information and Warning System; 
- 
to collaborate preparation and periodically review of Flood and Mud Flood Emergency 
Plans together with State Water Administration. 
 
2. The competence of the Authorized State Hydrometeorology Body with regard to the 
implementation of this Code includes:  
 
- 
to participate in National Water Council and Basin Council; 
- 
to undertake tasks regarding the National Water Resources Monitoring System; 
- 
to undertake tasks relating to information systems, State Water Cadastre, and state land-
reclamation cadastre.   
 
Article 16. Competence of local state administration bodies  
 
1. Competence of local state administration bodies for the purposes of this Code includes: 
- 
to approve the location, size, area and regime of sanitary protection zones; 
- 
to participate in Basin Council work; 


--- PAGE 10 ---

 10
- 
to advise on the creation of and implementing the rules relating to water protection zones 
in accordance; 
- 
to issue by-laws to regulate activities and implement protection works in areas where 
there are risks of floods and mud-floods. 
 
2. On the proposal of the State Water Administration the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
specifies which of local state administration body is to exercise tasks and competences 
specified in this Code.   
 
CHAPTER THREE – WATER RESOURCES MONITORING AND PLANNING  
Article 17. State Monitoring of Water Resources  
 
1. On the proposal of the National Water Council the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
establishes an effective National Water Resources Monitoring System that enables the 
National Water Council, the State Water Administration, the State Environmental 
Protection Body and the State Hydro Geology Body to fulfill their tasks in accordance 
with this Code. 
 
2. The Government regulates the activity of the State Water Administration, the authorized 
State Environmental Protection Body, the authorized State Hydro meteorology Body, the 
authorized State Hydrogeology Body and other state bodies concerning monitoring, 
collection, analysis and transfer of data relating to: 
- 
the quantity of water resources in the Kyrgyz Republic; 
- 
the quality of water resources in the Kyrgyz Republic; 
- 
the use of water resources in the Kyrgyz Republic; 
- 
the compliance with any standards and objectives for water quality; 
- 
the risk of floods, mud-floods and droughts; 
- 
the health of aquatic ecosystems; and 
- 
atmospheric conditions which may influence water bodies and water resources. 
  
3. On the proposal of the National Water Council the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
issues instructions concerning: 
 
- 
procedures, standards and methods for the monitoring of water resources; and 
- 
format and time period for the provision of data to the State Water Administration and the 
authorized State Environmental Protection Body.  
 
4. Monitoring information gathered in accordance with this article forms part of the State 
Water Cadastre. 
 
Article 18. The National Water Strategy 
 
1. The National Water Council prepares the National Water Strategy for approval by the 
President of the Kyrgyz Republic.   
 
2. The National Water Strategy sets out the main principles and provisions that are to be 
followed in the development of any plan, program, documents, decisions or actions 
concerning the use, protection and development of the Water Fund.   
 


--- PAGE 11 ---

 11
3. The National Water Strategy is developed in accordance with the provisions of this article 
and as a minimum identifies: 
 
- 
the quantity and quality of existing water resources and water bodies and their uses by all 
sectors of the economy; 
- 
the volume of unused flow of water resources taking into account environmental needs 
and international agreements concerning water relations; 
- 
short, medium and long term water requirements for each sector of the economy;  
- 
the institutional and administrative arrangements necessary for its implementation; 
- 
modern techniques and strategies to give effect to water requirements;  
- 
the need for and possibilities relating to inter-basin transfers taking into account Basin 
Plans. 
 
4. Following its approval, the State Water Administration ensures that the main principles of 
the National Water Strategy are widely disseminated to the population through mass 
media.  
 
5. All state bodies shall implement the National Water Strategy in fulfilling their tasks 
pursuant to this Code.  
 
6. The National Water Council shall review the National Water Strategy at intervals of not 
less than five years and proposes amendments to the President of the Kyrgyz Republic as 
appropriate. 
 
Article 19. State Water Economy Programs 
 
1. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic develops and implements state water economy 
programs, their investment and financing. 
 
2. State water economy program includes as minimum construction, rehabilitation and 
modernization of: 
 
- 
irrigation and drainage systems, including planting of forestry protection plantations along 
them; 
- 
hydroelectric power stations; 
- 
communal water supply systems of cities and rayon centers; 
- 
rural water supply systems; 
- 
waste water treatment plants. 
 
3. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall review state water economy program no 
less than once every five years. 
 
Article 20. Basin Plans for the Development, Use and Protection of Water Resources 
 
1. The State Water Administration establishes programs and schedules for the development 
of Basin Plans on Development, Use and Protection of Water Resources within each 
Principal Basin and organizes their implementation. 
 
2. Draft Basin Plans are prepared by the Basin Councils and submitted for approval to the 
National Water Council. 
 


--- PAGE 12 ---

 12
3. Each Basin Plan: 
 
- 
includes an assessment of the risks of water shortages, drought, flood, pollution and dam 
failure within the Basin and the costs of preventing, reducing or mitigating of such risks; 
- 
identifies areas in which there are particular risks of diffuse source pollution; 
- 
contains the review of existing protection zones; 
- 
identifies the areas at risk from floods and mud floods and the types of activities that 
should be prohibited or restricted in such areas.  
 
4. In addition a Basin Plan may: 
 
- 
include an assessment of the quality and quantity of water resources within the Basin; 
- 
contain an identification of current and anticipated future types and quantities of water 
use; 
- 
contain an evaluation of the quantity of water available for additional use, if any, taking 
into account of environmental requirements and any obligations under international law; 
- 
identify  a need in water for ecological and human needs;  
- 
assess investment and financing requirements together with the identification of possible 
funding sources; 
- 
set up priorities for water use and possible restrictions for water use among different 
sectors of economy; 
- 
identify the places where it is necessary to construct of bank protection dams on 
maintenance of agricultural lands and provide planting of forestry protection plants; 
- 
identify areas where gravel and other materials may be extracted from rivers. 
 
5. The State Water Administration establishes procedures for the preparation of draft Basin 
Plans that must afford an opportunity for water users to participate in the process and to 
comment on the draft plans. 
 
6. The State Water Administration and the relevant Basin Water Administration give effect 
to the applicable Basin Plan in fulfilling their tasks in accordance with this Code.  
 
7. Each Basin Plan is reviewed by the relevant Basin Council every five years and submitted 
to the National Water Council for its approval. 
CHAPTER FOUR – THE ABSTRACTION AND USE OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
Article 21 Rights and duties of water users 
 
1. The water resources of the Kyrgyz Republic are used in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code.    
  
2. For the purposes of this Code the use of water resources includes: 
 
– abstraction of water from a surface water body or an underground water body; 
– conveyance of abstracted water for supply to another person;  
– use of water for drinking and domestic purposes; 
– use of water for watering household plots; 
– use of water for irrigation and livestock watering; 
– use of sewage and waste water for irrigation; 
– use of water for hydropower generation; 
– use of water for industrial and agro-industrial purposes; 


--- PAGE 13 ---

 13
– use of water for fishing and fish farming; 
– use of water for sport and recreational purposes;  
– impoundment or storage of water bellow a dam or other water economy construction;  
– diversion, restriction or alteration of the flow of water within a water body; 
– alteration of the bed, poima, banks, course or characteristics of a water body, including the 
abstraction of gravel and other materials from such water bodies; 
– the use of water for irrigation (washing) of salinity lands. 
 
3. Water users must: 
- 
use water carefully so as to avoid pollution; 
- 
comply with conditions and obligations imposed on their right to use water including all 
conditions specified in accordance with this Code as well as those contained in a Water 
Use Permission, Special Water Use Permission or Water Supply Contract; and 
- 
not violate the rights of other lawful water users. 
 
4. Water users have the right: 
- 
to use water in accordance with the provisions of this Code; 
- 
to participate in decision making on water resource management; 
- 
for compensation when their right to use water is restricted or terminated in accordance 
with the provisions specified in this Code;  
- 
to information concerning the quantity, quality and use of  water resources in accordance 
with the provisions of this Code; and 
- 
to use water bodies for rest, tourism, sport and recreation arrangements. 
 
Article 22. Water use that does not require a water use permission  
  
1. Surface water resources may be used without a Water Use Permission: 
 
- 
for drinking and domestic water supply, livestock watering and other individual needs in 
cases where a permanent water economy construction is not used to abstract water from a 
water body;  
- 
for recreation; 
- 
for fire fighting; 
- 
for watering household plots without the use of a permanent water economy construction;  
- 
in cases where water is directly or indirectly supplied on the basis of, and in compliance 
with the provisions of, a Water Supply Contract; 
- 
for irrigation by a person who is lawfully supplied with water by a Water Users’ 
Association. 
 
2. Underground water resources may be used without Water Use Permission for domestic 
needs and the watering of household plots and livestock in accordance with the provisions 
of article 42(2) of this Code. 
 
3. The State Water Administration may restrict or prohibit the types of water use described 
in sub-articles 1 and 2 of this article in a defined area or throughout the Kyrgyz Republic 
during periods of drought or water shortage or where water quality has been harmed, 
where radiation or waterborne diseases have spread or there is a risk of that.   
 
Article 23. Water use that requires a water use permission 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---

 14
1. The following activities may be only undertaken within the Kyrgyz Republic on the basis 
of a Water Use Permission issued by State Water Administration in accordance with this 
Code: 
 
- 
abstraction, conveyance and use of water from surface water bodies where this involves 
the use of permanent water economy constructions including the use of movable pump 
stations with total capacity of 5 liter/second; 
- 
abstraction and conveyance of water for supply to another person in accordance with a 
Water Supply Contract concluded in accordance with Chapter Five of this Code; 
- 
use of underground water except in those cases specified in article 42(2) of this Code; 
- 
use of sewage and waste water for irrigation;  
- 
impoundment or storage of water bellow a dam or other water economy construction; 
- 
use of impounded or stored water for power generation, fishing, fish farming or other 
economic activities;  
- 
diversion, restriction or alteration of the flow of water within a water body; 
- 
alteration of  the bed, banks or characteristics of a water body; 
- 
the extraction of gravel and other materials from water bodies and the lands of the water 
fund. 
 
2. A Water Use Permission lasts for fifteen years except in cases where: 
 
- 
the applicant requests a shorter duration at the time the application is made; or  
- 
the permission relates to the extraction of gravel and/or other minerals in which case the 
maximum duration of the permission is five years.  
 
Water Use Permission is personal to the permission holder and may only be transferred in 
accordance with article 30 of this Code.  
 
3. A Special Water Use Permission that can last for up to fifty years may be granted by the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in cases where a substantial long term investment is 
to be made by the applicant regarding the construction, improvement or rehabilitation: 
 
– of a dam for hydropower or other purposes; 
– of a water economy construction for the delivery of drinking water; or  
– of an irrigation system.  
 
4. Water Use Permissions, including Special Water Use Permissions, are created and 
regulated by this Code and other normative legal acts issued according to this Code. 
 
 
Article 24. Priorities for water use 
 
Until such time as Basin Plans are approved that specify a different order of priorities for the 
purposes of water use, the allocation of water, including underground water, for use on the 
basis of a Water Use Permission or Special Water Use Permission takes place in accordance 
with the following priorities:  
 
- 
the use of water for domestic/drinking water supply purposes; 
- 
the use of water for the purpose of irrigation and the watering of livestock;  
- 
the use of water for the purpose of hydropower generation; 
- 
the use of water industrial activity, including mining and agro-industry; 
- 
the use of water for the purpose of fishing and fish farming; 


--- PAGE 15 ---

 15
- 
the use of water for the purposes of sport and recreation; 
- 
the use of water for other purposes. 
 
Article 25. Contents of water use permissions 
 
1. Every Water Use Permission specifies:  
 
- 
the activity that is permitted; 
- 
the quantity of water the permission holder is entitled to abstract, impound, divert and use, 
either by reference to a fixed volume or a share of the flow; 
- 
in case of a permission to extract gravel and/or other materials, the matters specified in 
article 86 (2) of this Code; 
- 
the volume of the return flow, if any, and the place where the return flow should be 
discharged; 
- 
the purpose for which the water is to be used;  
- 
in cases where the water is to be used for the purpose of irrigation, the area of land to 
which the use of water relates; 
- 
the period of validity of the permission; 
- 
other matters that may be prescribed by the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic on the 
proposal of the National Water Council. 
 
2. Each Water Use Permission contains the following general requirements in accordance 
with which the permission holder must: 
 
- 
rationally use water for the specified purpose as to avoid waste and harm to the 
environment; 
- 
pay all fees or charges relating to the Water Use Permission; 
- 
install or allow the installation of the constructions and equipment for measurement of the 
quantity of water in accordance with the requirements of the State Water Administration; 
- 
register the volume of used water including drain and revolving flowing in accordance 
with the requirements of the State Water Administration;  
- 
provide to the State Water Administration the detail information contracts for water 
supply referred to the Water use permission and also the information on any changes and 
amendments to the contracts in cases if the permission holder is the water supplier; 
- 
provides information concerning their use of the water to the State Water Administration 
where this is reasonably necessary for the management of water resources. 
 
3. A Water Use Permission may be subject to special conditions which specify: 
 
- 
how the water is to be used; 
- 
measuring requirements concerning ground water levels in the case of irrigation activities; 
- 
seasonal or temporal variations in the use of the water; 
- 
measures to be taken to reduce the effects of diffuse source pollution; 
- 
additional environmental protection measures; and  
- 
other conditions determined by the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
4. A Water Use Permission that authorizes the abstraction and conveyance of water for 
drinking purposes does not remove the obligation of the permission holder to follow 
sanitarian hygienic and financial requirements in accordance with the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic “On Drinking Water”. 
 


--- PAGE 16 ---

 16
Article 26. Applications for water use permissions and their determination 
 
1. Applications for Water Use Permissions are submitted in writing to the State Water 
Administration. Every application for a Water Use Permission shall be made in the 
standard form that includes: 
- 
a description of the proposed use to which the application relates;  
- 
a plan and description of the site of the proposed use together with the location of any 
water economy constructions or other facilities relating to the proposed use; 
- 
an ecological expertise in cases required by the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic; 
- 
a description of the quantity of any water to be used as well as details of the volume of 
any return flows and waste water discharges;  
- 
a description of the proposed means of measuring the quantities of water to be used and 
discharged; 
 
2. Within thirty days of receipt of the application, the State Water Administration shall 
inspect the site to which the application relates and shall publish a notice of the 
application in official publications circulating in the area. The reasonable cost of the 
inspection and publication is paid by the applicant.  
 
3. Any legal or physical persons who object to the application may file written objections to 
the State Water Administrations within thirty days of the publication of the notice of the 
application. 
 
 
4. Within consideration and determining of an application for a Water Use Permission the 
State Water Administration shall consult: 
- 
the authorized State Environmental Protection Body; 
- 
the authorized State Hydrogeology Body if the application relates to the use of 
groundwater or the extraction of gravel and other materials; 
- 
the authorized State Sanitarian and Epidemiological Body in all cases except drift floating 
of trees. 
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic specifies procedures concerning such 
consultations. 
 
5. In cases where the use of water will also involve the discharge of wastes, wastewater or 
pollutants, the application shall be dealt with as if a simultaneous application had been 
made for Discharge Permission. In all cases applications for Water Use Permission that 
are subject for this article must comply with applications for Discharge Permission that 
are subject for article 52 of this Code. 
 
6. The State Water Administration shall determine each application for Water Use 
Permission other than Special Water Use Permission in accordance with sub-article 8.  
 
7. The State Water Administration shall forward each application for Special Water Use 
Permission to the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic accompanied by its written 
recommendations so that the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic may make a 
determination in accordance with sub-article 8. 
8. Every application for a Water Use Permission or a Special Water Use Permission, is 
determined by reference to the following matters: 
- 
National Water Strategy;  
- 
availability of the sufficient water resources; 


--- PAGE 17 ---

 17
- 
allocation of water in the relevant Basin Plan and the obligations of the Kyrgyz Republic 
under international law; 
- 
applicable priorities for water use; 
- 
existing lawful uses of water by other water users and the impact that issuing a water use  
permission might have on them; 
- 
contents of any environmental expertise or environmental impact assessment required by 
law; 
- 
written objections to the application; and  
- 
environmental requirements of the water body in question, including the minimum 
ecological flow requirements specified in article 64 of this Code. 
During consideration of any application for a new Water Use Permission the decision 
maker shall not derogate from any existing Water Use Permission granted in accordance 
with this Code except in cases according to article 28 of this Code. 
 
9. During 30 days the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic within consideration of the 
application for the Special permission and the State Water Administration within 
consideration of the application for Water use permission shall notify the applicant on the 
decision in written form (agreement or refusal). In case of rejection the reasons should be 
provided.   
 
10. In the event that an application for Water User Permission, not being Special Water User 
Permission, is rejected the applicant may make a written request to the Head of the State 
Water Administration for a review of the decision, which review must be dealt with 
within 60 days of the date of submission of the request. If the application is once again 
rejected written reasons are provided. 
 
Article 27. The temporary suspension and variation of water use permissions 
 
Water Use Permission and Special Water Use Permission may be temporarily suspended 
and/or varied by the State Water Administration and Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
respectively, in the following circumstances: 
a. following the issue of a Drought and Water Shortage Order; 
b. in the case of non-compliance by the permission holder with the conditions of the 
permission; 
c. at the request of the permission holder; 
d. following the declaration of an Emergency Ecological Situation or Ecological Disaster in 
accordance with article 70 of this Code or the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic “On 
Environmental Protection”.  
Article 28. The cancellation or permanent variation of water use permissions  
 
1. A Water Use Permission may be cancelled or permanently varied: 
 
a) where it is necessary to re-allocate the water for another purpose in accordance with the 
public interest and the relevant Basin Plan; 
b) in the case of non-compliance by the permission holder with the terms of the permission, 
following an earlier period of suspension of the permission  
c) if that permission has been transferred, otherwise than in accordance with article 30 of 
this Code; 
d) at the request of the permission holder; 
e) if the water to which the permission relates has not been used for a period of three years 
on end; 


--- PAGE 18 ---

 18
f) on the death or liquidation of the permission holder; 
g) if the holder of the permission has been convicted of a an offence specified under this 
Code. 
 
2. Water Use Permission may be cancelled or permanently varied by the State Water 
Administration.  Special Water Use Permission may be cancelled or permanently varied 
by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. A decision to cancel or permanently vary 
Water Use Permission, including a Special Water Use Permission, may be appealed to the 
Courts. 
 
3. An application by a permission holder to vary permission is accompanied by proof of 
payment of the application fee and other data that is specified in regulations issued by the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
4. Before canceling or permanently varying a Water Use Permission in cases where the 
permission holder is a Bulk Water Supplier, the State Water Administration shall consult 
the holders of any Water Supply Contracts relating to the water described in the 
permission. If a decision is made to cancel a permission in accordance with clauses b), d), 
e), f) or g) of sub-article 1 the State Water Administration or, as the case may be, the 
Government may transfer the permission to one or more of the holders of the relevant 
Water Supply Contracts or their nominee. 
 
5. In the case of a cancellation or variation pursuant to sub-article 1 a) of this article: 
- 
the permission holder shall be provided with a new permission to use an equivalent 
volume of water from an alternative source; or 
- 
compensation must be paid in case of the lack of the alternative source. 
 
The compensation is issued on the base of the regulation approved by the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
6. If the amount of compensation cannot be agreed between the parties matter shall be 
determined by the court. In cases where the permission holder is a Bulk Water Supplier 
the holders of Water Supply Contracts that relate to water supplied under the relevant 
permission shall also be entitled to receive compensation if water cannot be provided to 
them from another source. 
  
Article 29. Extension of water use permission 
 
1. Not later than twelve months before its expiry, the holder of Water Use Permission may 
apply to the State Water Administration for the permission to be extended for a further 
period of fifteen years or shorter period. The application shall be accompanied by such 
documents as may be determined in regulations issued by the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic. Once a valid application has submitted, the relevant permission remains in force 
until the application has been determined. 
  
2. The State Water Administration renews an application to extend a Water Use Permission 
unless the order of priorities in the applicable Basin Plan provides for some or all of the 
water to be re-allocated for another purpose or there are other compelling public interest 
reasons for rejecting the application or for permitting the use of a lesser quantity of water. 
The State Water Administration gives written reasons for its decision if it rejects an 
application to extend Water Use Permission or if the new permission permits the use of a 
lesser quantity of water.  


--- PAGE 19 ---

 19
 
3. Special Water Use Permission may be extended by the Government in circumstances 
where the permission holder can demonstrate that the initial duration of the permission 
will not be sufficient to enable him to recover the costs of the investment to which the 
permission relates. In such cases the permission holder files an application for an 
extension, which is accompanied by data justifying the need for the extension, as may be 
determined in regulations issued by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
Article 30. Transfer of water use permissions 
 
1. With the exception of a Water Use Permission that relates to the use of water for 
irrigation, the holder of Water Use Permission and the holder of Special Water Use 
Permission may transfer that permission to another person. 
2. An irrigation Water Use Permission may only be transferred in accordance with sub-
article 3 of this article.  
3. The holder of an irrigation Water Use Permission who sells or otherwise disposes of his 
interest in the land to which the permission relates must at the time of the disposal either 
surrender the permission to the State Water Administration or transfer the Water Use 
Permission to the new owner or user of the land plot. s 
4. A transferred Water Use Permission remains valid provided the transferee registers the 
transfer with the State Water Administration within two months of the date of the transfer.  
5. On the death or liquidation of the holder of Water Use Permission, the successor is 
entitled to the Water Use Permission provided he registers his succession with the State 
Water Administration within two months of the date of the transfer.      
 
Article 31. Administrative fees for the issue, variation, renewal and registration of water 
use permissions  
 
1 
Administrative fees for applications for the issue, variation, renewal and registration of 
Water Use Permissions including Special Water Use Permissions are levied by the State 
Water Administration.  
 
2 
The level of such administrative fees are determined  by the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic taking into account the actual administrative and other costs of the State Water 
Administration and other state bodies involved in dealing with the relevant application, 
including the reasonable costs of publishing relevant applications.  
 
Article 32. Register of Water Use Permissions 
 
The State Water Administration must maintain a register that shall include: 
• details of all Water Use Permissions issued in accordance with this Code; 
• details of all applications made in respect of the grant of new permissions, or the 
variation of existing permissions;  
• any monitoring information required to be filed with the State Water Administration 
by the permission holder in accordance with the conditions of the permission;  
• in the case of a Water Use Permission held by a Bulk Water Supplier, details of any 
Water Supply Contracts relating to the water described in the permission; and 
• details of any enforcement action taken by the State Water Inspectorate in respect of 
the permission. 
 


--- PAGE 20 ---

 20
CHAPTER FIVE – USE OF WATER ON THE BASIS OF WATER SUPPLY 
CONTRACTS 
 
Article 33. Water Supply Contracts 
 
1. Water users who are directly supplied with water by a Bulk Water Supplier may make a 
request to the latter to enter into Contract conclusion in accordance with the provisions of 
this Chapter.  
 
2. Upon receipt of a request made under sub-article 1 by a Water User’s Association, an 
industrial enterprise or a municipal body responsible for the supply of water within towns 
and settlements, a Bulk Water Supplier must enter into a Water Supply Contract. 
 
3. Upon receipt a request made under sub-articles 1) and 2) by any other water user a Bulk 
Water Supplier may enter into a Water Supply Contract save that a Bulk Water Supplier 
may not enter into a Water Supply Contract with a person who owns or uses land within 
the Service Area of a Water User’s Association, as defined in the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic “On Unions (Associations) of Water Users”. 
  
Article 34. Terms of Water Supply Contracts and water rights according to them 
 
1. Each Water Supply Contract is concluded for a term of fifteen years; in accordance with 
the application of the water user it may be concluded for a shorter period. 
 
2. Each Water Supply Contract specifies the ‘Maximum Water Right’ and the ‘Minimum 
Water Right’ of the water user. 
  
3. The ‘Maximum Water Right’ is the maximum annual volume of water that the water user 
can call on the Bulk Water Supplier to supply, subject to the availability of adequate water 
resources.  
 
4. The ‘Minimum Water Right’ is the minimum volume of water that the Bulk Water 
Supplier must annually supply to the water user unless the Water Use Permission held by 
the Bulk Water Supplier is temporarily varied or suspended in accordance with article 27 
of this Code due to a drought, water shortage or emergency situation.  
 
Article 35. Calculation of water rights under Water Supply contracts 
 
5. The Maximum Water Right and Minimum Water Right in respect of each Water Supply 
Contract are calculated by the Bulk Water Supplier by reference to the following criteria: 
 
- 
the actual volume of water used by the water user or the water user’s predecessor in 
respect of the same irrigation system, water economy construction, enterprise or drinking 
water supply network demonstrated by historical records over the previous twenty years 
or for so long a period as is available and the design parameters of the irrigation system, 
enterprise or drinking water supply network in question; 
- 
the volume of water requested by the water user; 
- 
historical records showing the total volume of water supplied by the Bulk Water Supplier 
or its predecessor over the  period;  
- 
the existence of and rights of other water users who are supplied with water from the same 
irrigation system by the same Bulk Water Supplier. 


--- PAGE 21 ---

 21
 
6. For each irrigation system or water economy construction Maximum and Minimum Water 
Rights for each user shall be calculated by reference to documentation, design indexes and 
historical records over a period of more then twenty years. 
 
7. In case of the lack of the historical records showing the total volume of water supplied 
during 20 years and in case of owners and users of new constructed bodies of water use or 
constructed less then 20 years ago Minimum and Maximum Water Rights shall be 
identified on the base of the instruction approved by the State Water Administration. 
 
Article 36. Allocation of water under Water Supply Contract 
 
1. Each Water Supply Contract shall specify an annual Notification Date, by which each 
water user must notify the Bulk Water Supplier of the volume of water it wishes to use 
during the following year, as well as the proposed delivery schedule. A water user may 
call for the delivery of a volume of water up to its Maximum Water Right or some lesser 
volume.  
 
2. Within four weeks of the Notification Date, the Bulk Water Supplier, on the basis of the 
available hydro-meteorological information, determines: 
 
- 
the total amount of water is likely to be available within each irrigation system or water 
economy construction during the course of the following year; and   
- 
on the basis of the notifications received from water users, whether there will be adequate 
water to supply each water user with the volume of water it has requested. 
 
3. If following a determination under sub-article 2 it appears to the Bulk Water Supplier that 
there will be adequate water available, the Bulk Water Supplier shall enter into an Annual 
Water Supply Agreement with each water user that must specify the total volume of water 
to be supplied to that user, the water delivery schedule and the payment schedule. 
 
4. If following a determination under sub-article 2, it appears that there will not be adequate 
water available, the Bulk Water Supplier shall determine a proposed reduced allocation 
for each water user who holds a Water Supply Contract on a pro-rata or equivalent basis 
and shall notify each water user accordingly.  
 
5. After notifying the water users of the proposed reduced allocation, the Bulk Water 
Supplier shall agree the water supply schedule with all water users supplied from the same 
irrigation system or water economy construction. 
 
6. If after conclusion of annual agreement for water supply hydro meteorological 
information is made more precise and proposed water available in the same irrigation 
system or water economy construction does not comply to total supply under annual 
agreements, Bulk Water Supplier amends annual agreement with attachment of new 
schedule of supply and payment after agreement with each water user. 
 
7. If following conclusion of annual agreement for water supply, it appears that there will 
not be adequate water available, then for reasons of control activity of the Bulk Water 
Supplier, it shall allocate water between holders of an annual agreements of that system 
on pro-rata basis in accordance with rules approved by the State Water Administration. 
 


--- PAGE 22 ---

 22
Article 37. Surplus water supply in accordance with the request of water users 
 
1. The holder of a Water Supply Contract may request the Bulk Water Supplier to supply 
him with a volume of water that is more than its Maximum Water Right.  
  
2. The Bulk Water Supplier may supply such greater amount of water provided surplus 
water is available as a result of other water users within the irrigation system requesting 
volumes of water that are less than their Maximum Water Rights. If more than one water 
users requests a volume of water in excess of its Maximum Water Right, the Bulk Water 
Supplier may supply surplus water to one or more water use on the base of the additional 
conditions to the annual agreement including higher payment for supply of additional 
volume of water. 
 
3. Procedures for selling off surplus water and connected with it changes of Water Supply 
Contract in accordance with sub-article 2 are specified in regulations issued by the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
Article 38. Conditions of Water Supply Contracts and Annual Water Supply 
Agreements 
 
1 The conditions of each Water Supply Contract and Annual Water Supply Agreement must 
replicate and give effect to any conditions contained in the relevant Water Use Permission 
held by the Bulk Water Supplier in respect of the quantity of water delivered. 
  
2 In Accordance with the proposal of the State Water Administration the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic approves the model annual Water Supply Contract and model annual 
Water Supply Agreement. 
 
Article 39. Legal effect of Water Supply Contracts and Annual Water Supply 
Agreements 
 
1. Water Supply Contract takes into consideration the conditions within violation of which 
the Bulk Water Supplier stops water supply to the water user. The Bulk Water Supplier 
may stop water supply if the water user does not pay for water supply services within 
three months. 
  
2. The Bulk Water Supplier is liable to pay compensation to the water user if it fails to 
supply the quantity of water specified in the Annual Water Supply Agreement in 
accordance with the delivery schedule except: 
 
- 
in cases of force-majeure; 
- 
in cases of non-fulfillment of the conditions specified in Water Supply Contract and 
Annual Water Supply Agreement; 
- 
where the relevant Water Use Permission held by the Bulk Water Supplier has been 
temporarily suspended or varied in accordance with article 26(1) a) or d).  
 
3. The regulation on the order of payment of compensation to the water user for incomplete 
delivery of water quantity identified in the annual agreement for water supply is approved 
by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
 


--- PAGE 23 ---

 23
4. Water Supply Contract can be cancelled on the grounds of mutual agreement of the 
parties or court decision. 
Article 40. Service Charges payable under Water Supply Contracts 
 
1. The State Water Administration identifies the order of giving an estimate for water supply 
services by the Bulk water Supplier. 
 
2. The amount of payment for water supply services is approved by the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
3. The means charged for services in accordance with water supply contract are used for 
recovery of annual expenses of the bulk Water Supplier on operation and maintenance of 
irrigation and drain systems including payment for obtaining by the Bulk Water Supplier 
the Water Use Permission and payment for use of water as the natural resource 
established by Jogurku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
4. The recording of volumes of water supplied is undertaken jointly by the water user and 
the Bulk Water Supplier in accordance with the terms of the Water Supply Contract.  
 
Article 41. Assignment of rights and obligations under Water Supply Contract 
 
1. A water user may assign some or all of its rights to water under a Water Supply Contract 
to another water user within the same irrigation system, on the written approval of the 
Bulk Water Supplier.  
 
2. In accordance with a decision of the State Water Administration a Bulk Water Supplier 
may assign it’s rights and duties under a Water Supply Contract to another water supplier.  
 
CHAPTER SIX – USE AND DEVELOPMENT OF UNDERGROUND WATERS 
Article 42. Use of underground waters 
 
1. Use of underground waters from wells more than thirty meters deep, which are equipped 
with electric pumps, shall take place on the basis of Water Use Permission or Special 
Water User Permission. 
 
2. The use of water for domestic needs, and the watering of household plots and livestock, 
abstracted from a well of less than 30 meters deep does not require a Water Use 
Permission, irrespective of whether the well is hand-operated or electrically powered. 
 
3. Use of water from non-regenerative zones of underground waters is prohibited. 
 
4. Drilling and use of artesian (self-emission) wells is permissible only with use of special 
equipment that allows to fully block off spontaneous flow from the well. 
 
Article 43. Permissions for water well drilling 
 
1. The drilling of wells may only be undertaken on the basis of a well drilling permission 
issued by the State Water Administration. A well drilling permission shall last for a period 
of one year and shall specify: 


--- PAGE 24 ---

 24
 
- 
the land area in which the well may be drilled; 
- 
the maximum depth of the well; 
- 
the type of drilling equipment to be used; and  
- 
other conditions specified in a regulation issued by the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic.  
 
2. The State Water Administration shall not issue a well drilling permission without the 
written agreement of the authorized State Hydro-geology Body. 
 
3. Every well drilling permission shall be subject to the condition that well drilling activities 
shall only be undertaken by a person who holds a professional well drillers license.  
 
4. The procedure for applying for a well drilling permission shall be determined in 
regulations issued by the State Water Administration. 
 
5. At the end of each drilling operation the holder of the well drilling permission must 
provide the State Water Administration and the authorized State Hydro-geology Body 
with a detailed hydro-geological report on the drilling operation. Such data must be 
provided within two months of the completion of drilling operation.  
 
Article 44. Professional well drillers licenses 
 
The professional activity on well drilling is implemented on the base of the license issued by 
the authorized State Body on Hydrology in accordance with the identified order. 
 
CHAPTER SEVEN – DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
Article 45.  Supply of drinking water 
 
1. The regulation of the supply of drinking water is implemented in accordance with the Law 
of the Kyrgyz Republic “On drinking water”. 
 
2. The abstraction and conveyance of water for drinking water networks shall take place on 
the basis of a Water Use Permission or Special Water Use Permission.  
 
Article 46. The construction and operation of sewerage systems 
 
The construction and operation of sewerage and other systems for the discharge of water and 
wastewater is governed by separate legislation. The discharge of sewage water and other 
wastes to water bodies is regulated by Chapter 9 of this Code. 
 
CHAPTER EIGHT – ECONOMIC MECHANISMS OF WATER USE 
ARTICLE 47. State financing 
 
The state shall contribute fully or partially to the financing of water use and protection 
regulation in the form of budgetary disbursements, allocation of credit, investments, grants, 
long-term loans, attraction of foreign investments and other forms stipulated by the legislation 
of the Kyrgyz Republic. 


--- PAGE 25 ---

 25
 
ARTICLE 48. Charges for the use of water as a resource  
 
1. The Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic may determine charges for the use of water 
as a resource for each main river basin on the base of actual expenses for research, 
estimate and protection of water resources as well as expenses for State Water 
Administration’s activity.  
 
2. Funds generated in accordance with this article may be applied for: 
 
- 
operating and administrative costs of State Water Administration and other state bodies 
involved in water resource management; 
- 
investment costs of water development projects that provide for the efficient management 
and use of water resources in accordance with the National Water Strategy;  
- 
projects identified by state water economy programs; and 
- 
other purposes as may be determined by the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
CHAPTER NINE – PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES FROM POLUTION 
AND DEPLITION 
ARTICLE 49. Classification of waters 
 
1. The National Water Council on the proposal of the State Water Administration following 
consultation with the authorized State Sanitarian and Epidemiological Body and the 
authorized State Environmental Protection Body, organizes classification of waters of the 
Kyrgyz Republic in accordance with the quality and the directions of their use for each 
water object. The directions of use may include, but not be limited, water use for drinking, 
agricultural and recreation purposes. 
 
2.  The authorized State Environmental Protection Body after agreement with the authorized 
State Sanitarian-Epidemiological Body proposes standards for water quality in respect of 
each water body that has been so classified. 
 
3. Standards for water quality are approved by the authorized State Sanitarian-
Epidemiological Body. 
 
ARTICLE 50. General prohibition of water pollution 
 
The discharge of wastes or pollutants to a water body, a water economy construction or the 
lands of the water fund is prohibited except in accordance with the terms of a valid Discharge 
Permission.  
 
ARTICLE 51. Banned substances and regulations on standards for discharge polluted 
substances and wastes into water bodies, water Economy constructions and lands of 
water fund 
 
1. On the proposal of the authorised State Environmental Protection Body the Government 
of the Kyrgyz Republic approves a list of substances, which because of their hazardous 
nature or the risk that they pose to the environment may never be discharged to any water 
body, water economy construction or the lands of the water fund. 


--- PAGE 26 ---

 26
 
2. On the proposal of the State Environmental Protection Body the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic issues regulations specifying: 
 
- 
maximum limit values for the discharge of pollutants and wastes to water bodies, water 
economy constructions and the lands of the water fund; 
- 
processes and standards for the treatment of pollutants and wastes prior to their discharge 
to water bodies, water economy constructions and the lands of the water fund.   
 
ARTICLE 52. Discharge Permission that authorise the discharge of wastes and 
pollutants to water bodies, water economy constructions or the lands of the water fund 
 
1. Discharge Permissions that authorise the discharge of wastes and pollutants to water 
bodies, water economy constructions or the lands of the water fund are issued by the 
authorised State Environmental Protection Body after agreement with the authorized State 
Sanitarian and Epidemiological Body and the State Water Administration.  
 
2. Every Discharge Permission that authorise the discharge of wastes and pollutants to water 
bodies, water economy constructions or the lands of the water fund contains conditions 
relating to: 
 
- 
amount of wastes or pollutants that may be discharged over a specified period; 
- 
description of the location of discharge constructions with their characteristics and  
enclosure of cartographical materials;  
- 
monitoring to be undertaken by the permission holder and the frequency with which 
monitoring information is to be provided to the authorized State Environmental Protection 
Body;  
- 
description of treatment or pre-treatment processes to which the wastes or pollutants are 
to be subjected prior to their discharge;  
- 
description of the construction, operation and maintenance of any structures necessary for 
the treatment or pre-treatment of wastes and pollutants or which regulate or control the 
manner or place of their discharge; and 
- 
such other matters as may be identified by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic 
necessary to minimize or prevent pollution of water bodies or water economy 
constructions and to meet applicable water quality objectives including seasonal or other 
variations on the quantity or concentration of pollutants that may be discharged. 
 
3. Discharge Permission may specify deadlines for the phased reduction of the quantity of 
concentration of pollutants that may be discharged.  
 
4. Discharge Permission shall last for a maximum period of three years. Discharge 
Permission may not be transferred to another person without the written permission of the 
authorised State Environmental Protection Body. 
  
5. Discharge Permissions that authorise the discharge of wastes and pollutants to water 
bodies and water economy constructions of the Kyrgyz Republic are issued and regulated 
by the Water Code of the Kyrgyz Republic and other normative legal acts of the Kyrgyz 
Republic issued in accordance with it. 
  
 


--- PAGE 27 ---

 27
ARTICLE 53. Applications for Discharge Permissions 
 
1. Every application for Discharge Permission is made in writing to the authorized State 
Environmental Protection Body and is accompanied by the necessary documents. The list 
of documents for making an application is identified by the authorized State 
Environmental Protection Body. 
  
2. The authorized State Environmental Protection Body before making a decision on 
approval of Discharge Permission must agree it with: 
 
- 
the authorized State Sanitary and Epidemiological Body.  
 
- 
the State Water Administration which must confirm that the issue of the Discharge 
Permission will not affect the rights of any holder of a Water Supply contracts relating to 
the same water economy construction; 
 
3. In determining each application for a Discharge Permission the authorized State 
Environmental Protection Body shall take account of: 
 
- 
normative of maximum-allowed discharges of pollutants developed and approved 
according to current legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic;  
- 
relevant Basin Plan;  
- 
other uses of the relevant water body or water economy construction and the potential 
impact on them, if any, of granting the Discharge Permission; 
- 
any classification of waters;  
- 
regulations issued in accordance with article 51 of this Code.  
 
4. Within 30 days the authorized State Environmental Protection Body notifies in written 
form the applicant on the decision made (agreement and refusal). The refusal should be 
motivated. 
 
ARTICLE 54. Suspension, variation or cancellation of water discharge permission that 
authorise the discharge of wastes and pollutants to water bodies, water economy 
constructions or the lands of the water fund 
 
The authorized State Environmental Protection Body may temporarily suspend, vary or 
cancel a Discharge Permission that authorise the discharge of wastes and pollutants to water 
bodies, water economy constructions or the lands of the water fund in the following 
circumstances: 
 
a. drought or water shortage or other emergency situation; 
b. non-compliance with the conditions of the permission;  
c. at the request of the permission holder;  
d. where this is necessary for reason of public interest 
e. where this is necessary to ensure compliance with water quality standards 
ARTICLE 55. Renewal of water discharge permission 
 
Water Discharge Permission may be renewed on the application of the permission holder at 
least one month prior to the expiry of the permission. The list of documents for application is 
determined by the authorized State Environmental Protection Body.  
 


--- PAGE 28 ---

 28
ARTICLE 56. Diffuse source pollution 
 
1. Each Basin Water Plan must identify areas that by reason of their topography and current 
or projected land use practices, such as the use of pesticides and fertilizers in agriculture, 
pose risks of diffuse source pollution to water bodies and water economy constructions 
and shall propose measures to prevent, reduce or mitigate such pollution.  Such measures 
may include the preparation and dissemination of technical guidelines, training programs 
and programs of financial assistance.  
 
2. Conditions in water use permissions must address the risk of diffuse pollution as the result 
of the use of the water and the measures that the permission holder has to undertake 
measures on prevention, reduction or alleviation of water resource pollution. 
 
3. The State Water Administration may declare Water Protection Zones to address problems 
of diffuse source pollution and may issue regulations to regulate activities within such 
zones so as to prevent or minimize diffuse source pollution.  
 
ARTICLE 57. Administrative fees for the issue, variation, and renewal of discharge 
permission  
 
Administrative fees for consideration for the issue, variation and renewal of Discharge 
Permissions are levied by the authorized State Environmental Protection Body. The level of 
such fees are determined the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic taking into account the 
actual administrative and other costs of the authorized State Environmental Protection Body 
and other state bodies involved in dealing with the consideration.  
 
ARTICLE 58. Register of discharge permissions 
 
The authorized State Environmental Protection Body maintains a register of Discharge 
Permissions, which must contain:  
 
- 
details of all Discharge Permissions that have been issued under this Code together with 
details of any suspensions, variations, cancellations and renewals; 
- 
details of all applications made to the authorized State Environmental Protection Body in 
respect of new Discharge Permissions; 
- 
details of any monitoring information required to be filed with the authorized State 
Environmental Protection Body by the permission holder in accordance with the 
conditions of the permission;  
- 
details of any enforcement action taken by the authorized State Environmental Protection 
Body in respect of the permission.  
 
ARTICLE 59. Water pollution charges 
 
1. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic on the proposal of the National Water Council 
establishes a system of charges for the discharge of wastes and pollutants to water as 
charges for the use of nature. 
  
2. The levels of such charges are set at a rate that will seek to discourage or minimize the 
discharge of wastes and pollutants to water bodies or water economy constructions as well 
as provide their ecology safety.  
 


--- PAGE 29 ---

 29
ARTICLE 60. Power to carry out water resource protection works 
 
1. In cases where pollutants or waste have been, or are likely to be, discharged to any water 
body, water economy construction or land of the water fund, the State Environmental 
Protection Body may: 
 
- 
serve a written notice on a responsible person ordering that person to undertake specified 
water resource protection works;  
- 
undertake such water protection works itself.  
 
2. Where the State Environmental Protection Body carries out water protection works it shall 
be entitled to recover its reasonable costs incurred by it in doing so from a responsible 
person. 
  
ARTICLE 61. Protection of underground water from pollution  
 
1. The plans of zoning identify areas which polluting or potentially threat to the quality of 
underground waters.  
 
2. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic issues regulations on the protection of 
underground water from pollution on the proposal of the State Water Administration and 
the authorized State Hydro-geological Body. 
  
ARTICLE 62. Protection of Glaciers  
 
It is strictly prohibited to apply coal, dust, oils or any other matter or substance to glaciers to 
increase the rate at which they melt and activities that may adversely affect the state and 
integrity of glaciers or the quality of the water that they contain, or which involve the 
extraction of ice from them.  
 
ARTICLE 63. Promotion of water saving measures 
 
The state stimulate and provide researches or development of new technologies, the 
establishment of new tools and equipment that reduce water use or prevent or reduce the 
pollution of water resources.   
 
Article 64. Minimum ecological flow requirements 
 
On the basis of a joint proposal from the authorized State Environmental Protection Body and 
the State Water Administration the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic specifies minimum 
ecological flow requirements for specified rivers and water bodies that are necessary to 
maintain the health of fish stocks and aquatic ecosystems.  
 
CHAPTER TEN  – PROTECTION ZONES 
ARTICLE 65. Types of protection zones  
 
1. The following types of protection zone may be declared pursuant to this Code:  
 
- 
Zones of Sanitary Protection; 


--- PAGE 30 ---

 30
- 
Zones of Stock Formation; 
- 
Groundwater Protection Zones; 
- 
Water Protection Zones; 
- 
Zones of emergency ecological situations and ecological disasters. 
 
2. Each Basin Plan contains a review of existing protection zones and their effectiveness 
and, as appropriate, makes recommendations regarding the designation of new protection 
zones or the alteration of the boundaries of existing protection zones. 
 
Article 66. Zones of sanitary protection  
 
1. Zones of Sanitary Protection are established around water economy bodies and water 
economy constructions that are used to abstract water from surface and underground 
water bodies for drinking and household water supply as well as for medicinal uses. A 
sanitary protection zones applies to the land around the relevant water economy 
construction, as well as to the water body itself. 
  
2. The location, size, area and regime of Sanitary Protection Zones are determined by the 
relevant local state administration body on the basis of the Basin Plan and the developed 
project agreed with the body of the sanitary-epidemiological supervision.  
 
3. A resolution regarding the size, location and operation regime of Sanitary Protection 
Zones is developed by the authorized state sanitary-epidemiological bogy and approved 
by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
Article 67. Zones of Stock Formation 
 
1. The area where rivers are formed shall be zones of stock formation. Zones of stock 
formation shall be identified by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic in accordance 
with the proposals of the State Water Administration and the authorized State 
Environmental Protection Body. 
  
2. Within every Zone of Stock formation it shall be prohibited to: 
 
- 
locate tailings dams, dumps, cemeteries, live-stock burial grounds and other economic 
objects that might harm the quality of water resources;  
- 
litter the ice cover of water bodies, glaciers and snow fields with industrial, domestic and 
other wastes and to pollute them by oil products, chemicals and other harmful matters;  
 
3. The regulations on prohibition or restriction of another types of activity in zones of stock 
formation shall be identified by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
Article 68. Groundwater Protection Zones 
 
1. The Government on the joint proposal of the State Water Administration and the 
authorized State Hydro-geological Body declares any area to be a Groundwater Protection 
Zone where the groundwater is particularly vulnerable to pollution or to protect the 
groundwater from overdraft.  
  
2. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic approves regulations on prohibiting or 
restricting specified activities within a Groundwater Protection Zone including: 
 


--- PAGE 31 ---

 31
- 
irrigation of lands with waste water;  
- 
abstraction of groundwater; 
- 
operation of industrial or commercial enterprises that use or store particular solvents or 
chemicals; 
- 
operation of landfill sites and dumps; 
- 
other types of activity identified by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic on the 
proposals of the State Water Administration  and the authorized State Hydro-geological 
Body.  
 
ARTICLE 69. Water protection zone 
 
1. In consultation with the authorized State Environmental Protection Body and local state 
administrations, the State Water Administration, may define Water Protection Zones 
adjacent or near to water bodies in which specified activities that by their nature have the 
potential to cause pollution or harm to water resources are restricted or prohibited. Such 
activities include:  
 
- 
location and operation of livestock farms; 
- 
application and use of pesticides and organic and chemical fertilizers; 
- 
operation of specified commercial and industrial enterprises; 
- 
storage, processing or disposal of wastes; 
- 
construction of structures.  
 
2. State control on following the regime of use and protection of water resources and other 
economic activity of physical and legal entities in the Water Protection Zone is performed 
by the State Water Administration, the State Environmental Protection Body, and local 
state administrations. 
 
ARTICLE 70. Zones of emergency ecological situations and ecological disasters at water 
bodies 
 
The President of the Kyrgyz Republic may make the decision on announcement of an 
Emergency Ecological Situation or an Ecological Disaster in respect of any water body in 
accordance with the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic “On Environmental Protection”. 
 
CHAPTER ELEVEN – EMERGENCY SITUATIONS 
Article 71. National Flood, Mud-flood, and Drought Information and Warning System  
 
1. On the proposal of the State Water Administration, the authorized State Emergency 
Situations Body and the authorized State Hydrometeorology Body the Government of the 
Kyrgyz Republic establishes a National Flood, Mud Flood, and Drought Information and 
Warning System to alert state bodies and members of the public to the short and medium 
threats of floods, mud-floods and droughts of local, Basin and National importance.  
 
2. The National Flood, Mud Flood, and Drought Information and Warning System contains 
historical information and current forecasts on: 
 
- 
floods, mud floods and land slides; 
- 
droughts; 
- 
the condition and sustainability of natural water bodies including high mountain lakes; 


--- PAGE 32 ---

 32
- 
the condition and sustainability of the main water economy constructions including dams 
within water reservoirs and protection dams at the rivers; and 
- 
threats of floods, droughts, mud-floods and land slides for population. 
 
3. On the proposal of the State Water Administration, the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic issues regulations on the dissemination of information contained in the National 
Flood, Mud Flood and Drought Information and Warning System. 
 
Article 72. Flood and Mud flood protection 
 
1. Each Basin Plan identifies those areas that are at risk from floods, mud floods and land 
slides and the types of activities that should be prohibited or restricted in such areas to 
prevent or minimize the risks to human life and property from floods and mud floods. 
 
2. In accordance with the Basin Plan in areas of the type specified in sub-article 1 it is 
prohibited: 
 
- 
To construct of any building or structure in an area that is at risk from flooding, mud 
flooding and land sliding without the written agreement of the State Water 
Administration; 
- 
To undertake specified activities that may cause flooding, mud flooding and land sliding 
without the written Agreement of the State Water Administration. 
 
3. The State Water Administration together with State Emergency Situations Body prepares 
annual programs for the construction, operation and maintenance of protection works to 
protect populated and industrial areas, human lives and property from risk of floods and 
mud floods. Such programs are submitted to the National Water Council for consideration 
and decision making on sources of financing.  
 
ARTICLE 73. Planning of measures for emergency situations 
 
In collaboration with the State Emergency Situations Body the State Water Administration 
prepares and periodically reviews Flood, Mud Flood and Land Slides Emergency Plans in 
respect of areas identified in the relevant Basin Plans and historical records.  
 
1. Flood, Mud Flood and land slides Emergency Plans identify: 
 
- 
emergency warning and information systems to promptly warn populations of the risks of 
floods, mud-floods and land slides; 
- 
the responsibilities of state bodies in the event of a mud, mud flood and land-slides; 
- 
systems for the evacuation of the civilian population; and 
- 
options regarding the provision of food and shelter for those who have been evacuated, 
and mechanisms for achieving this. 
 
2. The procedures and the order of removal of emergency situations are identified by the 
Law of the Kyrgyz Republic ‘On Protection of Population and Territories from 
Emergency Situations of Natural and Technogenic Character’ and other normative and 
legal acts of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
 


--- PAGE 33 ---

 33
Article 74. Droughts and Water Shortages  
 
The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic may in times of drought or water shortage shall 
have the right to: 
 
- 
introduce restrictions on some or all activities that involve the use of water resources; 
- 
limit or restrict the use of water pursuant to Water Use Permissions and/or Water 
Discharge Permissions; 
- 
temporarily defines new priorities for the use of water within the area that is subject to the 
drought and water shortage;  
CHAPTER TWELVE – DAM SAFETY 
ARTICLE 75. Responsibilities of the owners and operators of dams 
 
The owner and operator of every dam shall be responsible: 
 
- 
for the safety of the dam; 
- 
for ensuring that the dam is maintained and operated in a safe manner; and 
- 
for any damage within caused as a result of its improper or unlawful operation. 
ARTICLE 76. Classification of dams  
 
1. Dams in the Kyrgyz Republic, including hydro-energy purposes, are classified into one 
the following three categories in accordance with criteria to be approved by the National 
Water Council on the proposal of the State Water Administration:  
 
- 
dams of national importance; 
- 
dams of Basin importance; 
- 
dams of rayon importance. 
 
2. Criteria for the classification of a dam are based on:  
 
- 
the height of the dam; 
- 
the volume of water that it impounds; 
- 
the risk to the public, property and water resource quality that the failure of the dam 
would pose;  
- 
the extent of potential loss or harm involved that the failure of the dam would cause; 
- 
possible change of water quality; 
- 
the socio-economic impacts of the failure of the dam; and 
- 
the international importance of such a dam.  
 
3. On the proposal of the State Water Administration the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic identifies the order of organization of inspection, monitoring arrangements and 
operational and maintenance requirements of the dams of national, basin and rayon 
importance. 
 
ARTICLE 77. The National Dam Safety Commission 
 
1. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall establish the National Dam Safety 
Commission as an independent technical body. 
 


--- PAGE 34 ---

 34
2. Following receipt of inspection reports, the National Dam Safety Commission makes 
recommendations to the State Water Administration regarding the need for remedial or 
construction works. On receipt of such recommendations, the State Water Administration 
may order the owner or operator of the dam to undertake remedial or construction works 
where this is necessary for safety reasons. 
  
3. The National Dam Safety Commission prepares proposals on inspection of dams to the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic according to established order. 
 
4. On the base of its inspection, the National Commission on Dam Safety prepares report on 
dam safety and makes the recommendations on removal of failure for: 
- 
dams of the national importance at least each five years 
- 
dams of basin importance at least each ten years 
- 
dams of rayon importance – at least each fifteen years. 
 
Article 78. Registration of dams 
 
1. The owner or operator of every dam must, within 6 months of the entry into force of this 
Code, apply to register that dam with the State Water Administration. The registration 
application shall be in the prescribed form and shall contain details of the owner or 
operator of the dam, the location of the dam, the size of the dam, details of the 
construction of the dam and other necessary information. 
 
2. The State Water Administration shall maintain a register of dams within the Kyrgyz 
Republic containing the information specified in sub-article 1. 
 
3. The owner or operator of each dam must file an annual report to the State Water 
Administration with details of any changes and bringing out defects in design of dam as 
well as on operation and maintenance. 
 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN – IRRIGATION AND OTHER WATER ECONOMY 
ACTIVITIES  
ARTICLE 79. Irrigation and Drainage Commissions 
 
1. Irrigation and Drainage Commissions are established at the National, Basin and local 
levels to:  
 
- 
to review the performance of relevant irrigation and drainage systems during the previous 
irrigation season and to make recommendations regarding operation and maintenance in 
the following irrigation season; 
- 
to supervise the implementation of any recommendations made and the preparations for 
the forthcoming irrigation season;   
- 
to act as a forum for information exchange and coordination among irrigation water users 
concerning irrigation and melioration condition of land; 
- 
to advise on issues that shall be their competence.  
 
2. The National Irrigation and Drainage Commission is chaired by the Head of the State 
Water Administration and includes the heads of its territorial bodies, other Bulk Water 
Suppliers, representatives of irrigation water users. The composition of the National 
Irrigation and Drainage Commission is approved by the Government of the Kyrgyz 


--- PAGE 35 ---

 35
Republic. The National Irrigation and Drainage Commission oversees the performance of 
specified irrigation systems of national and international importance. 
  
3. Each Basin Irrigation and Drainage Commission is chaired by the Head the relevant basin 
body of the State Water administration and must include water suppliers and 
representatives of irrigation water users. The composition of the Basin Irrigation and 
Drainage Commission is approved by the State Water Administration. The Basin 
Irrigation and Drainage Commission oversees the performance of specified irrigation 
systems of Basin importance.       
 
4. Each Local Irrigation and Drainage Commission is chaired by the local territorial body on 
operation and maintenance of the state irrigation systems and includes the representatives 
of irrigation water users. The composition of the rayon commission on irrigation and 
drainage shall be approved by the State Water Administration.  Each local irrigation and 
drainage commission oversees the performance of specified irrigation and local systems 
of local importance.  
 
ARTICLE 80. Implementation of works on maintenance of irrigation and drainage 
systems  
 
1. The owner or user of an irrigation and drainage system is responsible for ensuring that it is 
properly maintained. The owner or user may either undertake such works itself or engage 
contractors. 
 
2. In the case of state owned irrigation and drainage system contractors are selected on a 
competitive basis in accordance with relevant procurement rules identified by the legislation 
of the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
3. During remedial maintenance and rehabilitation deforestation within easements of canals 
and water economy constructions as well as sanitarian felling are carrying out without 
agreement with specially authorized state bodies. 
 
ARTICLE 81. Plans for the operation and maintenance of irrigation systems  
 
1. On the base of defect acts and findings of the irrigation and drainage commissions, Bulk 
Water Suppliers develops plans on operation, maintenance and reconstruction of irrigation 
and drainage systems. Plans are developed to be implemented within a year and for 
prospective. 
 
2. Minimum content of annual plans on operation and maintenance of irrigation and 
drainage systems includes: 
 
- 
identification of the required volume of repairing works in accordance with the their 
types, irrigation and drainage systems with identification of design cost of their 
implementation; 
- 
chosen of executers for implementation of repairing works, preparation of repairing work 
schedule taking into account the beginning of the irrigation season; and 
- 
defining needs for operation and maintenance of irrigation systems and financial abilities 
of water suppliers. 
 


--- PAGE 36 ---

 36
3. Minimum content of prospective plans on reconstruction (rehabilitation) of irrigation and 
drainage systems includes: 
 
- 
identification of the list of irrigation systems with served infrastructure that require 
reconstruction; 
- 
establishment of volume of works (in accordance with the type) for reconstruction of 
irrigation constructions with identification of a design cost of their implementation; 
- 
identification of economic effectiveness of designed works on reconstruction of irrigation 
systems; 
- 
preparation of a schedule on reconstruction of irrigation systems for the nearest 5 years 
including the current year; and 
- 
identification of the source of financing for reconstruction of irrigation systems. 
 
ARTICLE 82.  Financing of the operation and maintenance of irrigation systems 
 
1. The costs of operating and maintaining state owned irrigation systems is funded from the 
state budget and from service charges for water supply services. 
 
2. Investment costs for the construction or rehabilitation of state owned irrigation systems 
are provided from the state budget, charges for water supply and other sources not 
prohibited by the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
ARTICLE 83. Irrigation and drainage subsidies    
 
On the proposal of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic the Jogorku Kenesh of the 
Kyrgyz Republic may approve annual subsidies for irrigation and drainage.  
 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN - THE OWNERSHIP AND USE OF WATER ECONOMY 
CONSTRUCTIONS AND THE LAND OF THE WATER FUND  
ARTICLE 84. Ownership of irrigation and drainage systems and water economy 
constructions 
 
1. Irrigation and drainage systems and water economy constructions may be in state or 
private ownership. 
 
2. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic on the proposal of the State Water 
Administration approves and periodically reviews a list of state owned irrigation and 
drainage systems and water economy constructions.  
 
3. Irrigation and drainage systems and water economy constructions of inter-rayon, inter-
oblast or inter-state importance or which are used, or which can be used, to provide 
service to more than one water user are in the exclusive ownership of the state. 
 
4. An irrigation and drainage systems or parts thereof (a canal, drain, collector or reservoir) 
and lands of water fund occupied by them that are operated or maintained by the State 
Water Economy Body and which serve only one Water Users’ Association may be 
transferred in ownership to that association in accordance with the order identified by the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 


--- PAGE 37 ---

 37
ARTICLE 85. Use of lands of the water fund  
 
1. Lands of the Water Fund except land occupied by irrigation, drainage systems and water 
economy constructions, may be given in use for needs of agriculture, fishery, hunting and 
other purposes on the base of the decision of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
  
2. The State Water Administration may limit the use of banks in defined areas or throughout 
the Kyrgyz Republic in the interests of environmental protection, water resource 
management or for such other reasons as may be determined by a decision of the 
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
3. In connection with issuing Water Use Permission, including Special Water Use 
Permission, lands of the water fund may be given in use for purposes of construction of 
water economy facility in accordance with the decision of the Government of the Kyrgyz 
Republic that takes into consideration: 
 
- 
terms of water fund lands use that can’t exceed the terms of water use permission 
- 
obligations of the user on removal of constructed by him water economy construction 
because of the deadline of the terms of the Water Use Permission or the conditions of 
transfer of the water economy facility to the state ownership and payment of 
compensation to the user. 
 
4. In the event of the expiry of the right to water funds lands use, the Water Use Permission 
and the Special Water Use Permission, the water economy construction shall be 
transferred to the state ownership with payment of compensation in accordance with 
legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
ARTICLE 86. Extraction of gravel and other materials from water bodies and water 
fund lands 
 
1. The extraction of gravel and other materials from river beds, their banks and related 
protection zones is prohibited except under the authority of a Water User Permission 
issued by the State Water Administration in accordance with Chapter 4 of this Code.   
  
2. A permission issued under this article shall last for a period of up to five years and shall 
be subject to conditions that specify: 
- 
the quantity and type of gravel or other material that may be extracted; 
- 
the means by which gravel or other material may be extracted; 
- 
the area, by reference to a plan, from which the gravel or other material may be extracted; 
and 
- 
requirements to the permission holder regarding data collection, monitoring and reporting 
relating to the permission. 
 
3. Permissions shall not be issued under this section in cases where the extraction of gravel 
is likely to cause harm to: 
- 
public water works; 
- 
the stability of water object banks; 
- 
aquatic fauna; 
- 
the use of water by existing water users; 
- 
safety to the water economy constructions. 
 


--- PAGE 38 ---

 38
4. The issue of Gravel and other Materials Extraction Permission is a subject to the payment. 
The amount of payment and the procedures for issuing Gravel Extraction Permission are 
specified by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
ARTICLE 87. Servitudes 
 
1. Servitudes may be established in accordance with the agreement of the parties (voluntary 
servitudes) or, in case of the necessity on the base of the decision of the authorized state 
body (forced servitude) for the purposes of water resource management, operation, 
maintenance and construction of irrigation, drainage systems and water economy 
constructions. 
 
2. The agreement on the servitude establishment (voluntary servitude) includes: 
- 
purposes of servitude establishment; 
- 
description of the parcel encumbered by servitude; 
- 
conditions and terms of servitude establishment; 
- 
a plan or a map of the parcel with identification of the p[lace of servitude location. 
 
3. The forces servitude may occur on the base of the decision of the authorised state body for 
provision of the excess to the land parcel when another excess necessary for the purposes 
of sub-article-1 is impossible or require disproportionate expenses. 
 
4. The decision of the authorised state body that takes into consideration the establishment 
of the servitude or the refusal of the land parcel owner or land user in servitude 
establishment may be disputed in court. 
 
5. Damages inflicted upon a landowner by establishment of servitude shall be subject to 
indemnification by the person in whose advantage the servitude is established. The 
amount of damages shall be defined by the State Water Agency and, in cases where the 
landowner disagrees, by the court. 
 
6. The servitude shall be kept in the case of transfer, change of the rights to the land parcel. 
 
7. The servitude occurred in accordance with the agreement may be established for uncertain 
term or the term taken into consideration by the agreement. The forced servitude may be 
terminated because of the termination of the grounds in accordance with which the 
servitude has been established due to the decision of the authorized state body or the 
court. 
 
 
8. The establishment of the servitude must be obligatory registered in accordance with the 
order identified in the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - THE STATE WATER INSPECTORATE 
ARTICLE 88. The state water inspectorate 
 
1. The State Water Inspectorate is a structural division of the State Water Administration 
that implements functions of state supervision on use of water bodies and water resources 
in the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 


--- PAGE 39 ---

 39
2. The Head of the State Water Administration is also the Chief State Water Inspector of the 
Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
ARTICLE 89.  Rights and duties of state water inspectors 
 
1. The State Water Inspection has the right to: 
- 
receive from the state bodies, enterprises, organization, institutions irrespectively from 
the form of property and departmental belonging and also from physical persons  free 
of charge information necessary for implementation of the duties except cases when 
the governing legislation establishes the special order of obtaining such information; 
- 
implement annual control of persons that have permissions for water use and water 
discharge in accordance with the identified schedule; 
- 
apply to the court in connection with violators of the water legislation. 
 
2. Within implementation of the duties the State Water Inspector must follow provisions and 
rules approved by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic or the State Water Administration. 
 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN - RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATION OF THE WATER 
LEGISLATION IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 
ARTICLE 90. Responsibility for violation of the water legislation in the Kyrgyz 
Republic. 
 
1. The violations of the water legislation are as follows: 
- 
use of water contrary to the terms of an order issued by the State Water Administration; 
- 
undertaking of activities or actions  without a Water Use Permission or a Special Water 
use Permission;  
- 
failure to comply with the conditions of a Water Use Permission or a Special Water Use 
Permission; 
- 
transfer a Water Use Permission or a Special Water Use Permission without the written 
approval of the State Water Administration;  
- 
uses of water from an artesian well or a well that is more than thirty metres deep without a 
Water Use Permission or Special Water Use Permission or use of groundwater from 
artesian (self-pouring out) well contrary without use of the special equipment that allows 
fully recover water entry from the well; 
- 
drilling of a well without a well drilling permission, or breach of the conditions of such a 
permission or fail to provide drilling report; 
- 
drilling of the well without holding a professional well drillers licence; 
- 
discharge of wastes or pollutants to a water body, water economy construction or the 
lands of the water fund otherwise than in accordance with a Discharge Permission 
contrary to it; 
- 
discharge of a banned substance to a water body, water economy construction or the lands 
of the water fund;  
- 
transfer of Discharge Permission to another person contrary; 
- 
contravene of rules or regulations to prevent diffuse source pollution; 
- 
unlawfully failure to comply with an order to under Water Protection Works; 
- 
contravene of underground water protection rules; 
- 
damage or other harms to glaciers; 
- 
breach of applicable rules in a Zones of Sanitary Protection;  
- 
breach of applicable rules within a Stock Formation Zones; 
- 
breach of applicable rules within a Groundwater Protection Zones; 
- 
breach of applicable rules within a Water Protection Zones; 


--- PAGE 40 ---

 40
- 
contravene of rules relating to mud-flood protection; 
- 
contravene of the terms of a drought order; 
- 
unlawfully failure of rules on dam safety; 
- 
failure to comply with a conditions of a permission to extract gravel and other materials;  
- 
contravene of rules relating to the use of the lands of water fund; 
- 
hinder to a State Water Inspector acting in the course of his duties or unlawfully refuse to 
provide information required. 
2. Persons violated water legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic bear criminal, administrative 
and other liability in accordance with the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
3. Legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic may establish responsibility for other kinds of water 
law violation. 
 
ARTICLE 91. Liability of citizens and legal entities for damage to water bodies. 
 
1. Citizens and legal entities that cause damage to water bodies recover it voluntary or in 
accordance with court or arbitrage decision in accordance with methods of calculation of 
damage caused to water bodies and if there are no such on factual expenses for 
rehabilitation of water bodies taking into account loses including lost benefits.  
 
2. Suits on recovery of damage caused to water bodies by violation of water legislation of 
the Kyrgyz Republic shall be mounted by the State Water Inspectorate, and the authorized 
State Environmental Protection Body.  
 
3. Damage recover amount levied by the decision of court and arbitrage transfers to the 
national or local budget of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
4. Conditions and order of damage recover caused to the water objects in case of violation of 
water legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic are regulated by this Code and other normative 
legal acts of the Kyrgyz Republic approved in accordance therewith. 
 
ARTICLE 92. Invalidity of transactions made with violation of water legislation of the 
Kyrgyz Republic 
 
Transactions made with violation of the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic are regarded as 
invalid. 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN – THE SINGLE WATER INFORMATION SYSTEM 
ARTICLE 93. Content of the single water information system 
 
The Single Water Information System comprise: 
 
- 
the Register of Water User Permissions and Special Water Use Permissions; 
- 
the Register Permissions on discharge of wastes and polluted matters to water bodies, 
water economy constructions and lands of water funds; 
- 
the State Water Cadastre;  
- 
other information identified by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
Article 94. The state water cadastre  
 
1. The State Water Cadastre includes information on: 


--- PAGE 41 ---

 41
 
- 
the quantity and quality of surface waters; 
- 
the quantity and quality of underground waters; 
- 
the lands of the water fund; and 
- 
the status, condition and location of state owned water economy constructions and 
irrigation systems. 
 
2. Information the state monitoring of water resourse is included in the State Water Cadastre, 
which is maintained to provide the necessary information for the purposes of water 
resources management, the planning of water economy development activities and the 
rational use and protection of the water fund. 
 
3. The State Water Cadastre is maintained by the State Water Administration, the authorized 
State Hydro-Meteorology Body and the authorized State Hydro geological Body in 
accordance with the Resolution approved by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic.  
 
4. The State Water Administration, the authorized State Hydro-Meteorology Body, the 
authorized State Hydro geological Body have the right to receive without difficulty and 
free of charge from enterprises, institutions, organization and citizens-water users 
information necessary for maintenance of the State Water Cadastre. 
 
ARTICLE 95. State ameliorative cadastre 
 
1. State ameliorative cadastre constitutes integrated data on ameliorative condition of irrigated 
lands in the context of water bodies and administrative and territorial division and establishes 
on the base of: 
- data on mineralization of ground waters in all existing observation wells; 
- data on sail survey of irrigated lands for financial and preceded years; 
- data fluctuations of level of ground waters taking into account seasonal fluctuations and 
statistics for preceded years. 
 
2. The State Ameliorative Cadastre is maintained by the State Water Administration 
according to the Provision of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic. 
 
3. The State Water Administration has the right to receive without difficulty and free of 
charge from enterprises, institutions, organization and citizens-water users information 
necessary for maintenance of the State Ameliorative Cadastre. 
 
ARTICLE 96. Public access to information systems 
 
The representatives of public shall have excess to the Single Information System except cases 
identified in item 2 of Article 97. 
 
ARTICLE 97. Restriction of access to information contained in the Single Information 
system 
 
1. The information that is regarded as the national secret in accordance with the legislation 
of the Kyrgyz Republic can’t be included in the Single Information System. 
 
2. A legal or a physical person may apply to the state body that operates the register for a 
ruling that information concerning a permission or an application for a permission that 


--- PAGE 42 ---

 42
would otherwise be included in a register be excluded on the grounds that the information 
is commercially confidential and the availability of such information on the register would 
cause that person economic harm or loss. In support of such an application the applicant 
must provide evidence of the harm or economic loss, which he/she claims would 
otherwise be caused.  
 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN – INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION IN THE FIELD OF 
WATER RELATIONS 
ARTICLE 98. Inter-country use of water bodies, water resources and water economy 
constructions of the Kyrgyz Republic 
 
Issues of inter-country use of water resources, water bodies, and water economy constructions 
as well as the protection of water resources of the Kyrgyz Republic are regulated by the 
Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic, laws of the Kyrgyz Republic, international agreements 
of the Kyrgyz Republic as well as the applicable provisions of international law. 
 
CHAPTER NINETEEN – FINAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 99. Enactment of This Code 
 
1. This Code shall come into force after the day of the official publication thereof. 
  
2. Before brining to conformity normative and legal acts governing at the territory of the 
Kyrgyz Republic in accordance with this Code, normative and legal acts of the Kyrgyz 
Republic shall be used in accordance within the limits and order that are taken into 
consideration by the Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic and shall not contradict of this 
Code. 
 
3. To suggest the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic within 6 month after approval of this 
Code to: 
 
- 
approve normative and legal acts that provide the implementation of this Code; 
- 
develop and present to the Jogorky Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic in accordance with the 
established order the proposals on amendments to the legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic 
because of the approval of this Code.  
 
 
 
President of the Kyrgyz Republic  
 
 
A. Akaev 
 
Approved by the Legislative Assembly 
of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic on 9th of Dec 2004. 
