****
[No source text was provided for translation. Please include the text from "PART 1" of the document.]

****
OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG MÉMORIAL A No. 690 of 3 August 2017

Law of 20 July 2017 amending the amended Law of 19 December 2008 on water.

We, Henri, Grand Duke of Luxembourg, Duke of Nassau,

Having heard our Council of State;
With the assent of the Chamber of Deputies;
Having regard to the decision of the Chamber of Deputies of 28 June 2017 and that of the Council of State of 4 July 2017 stating that a second vote is not required;

Have ordered and do order:

**Art. 1.**
The following amendments are made to Article 2 of the amended Law of 19 December 2008 on water, hereinafter referred to as "the Law":
1. A point 9a, worded as follows, is inserted:
<< 9a. "environmental flow": the minimum flow required to preserve the proper functioning of the aquatic ecosystem and to achieve the environmental objectives for surface waters; >>
2. Point 37 is deleted.

**Art. 2.**
Paragraph 3 of Article 12 of the Law is replaced as follows:
"(3) The pricing schemes shall distinguish between four sectors:
a) the household sector, which includes natural persons, public institutions, and businesses that are not part of the industrial sector, the agricultural sector, the Horeca sector, or the campsite sector;
b) the industrial sector, which includes businesses whose water consumption exceeds one of the following thresholds: 8,000 cubic meters per year, 50 cubic meters per day, or 10 cubic meters per hour, or whose pollutant load exceeds 300 average population equivalents;
c) the agricultural sector, which includes the activities of farmers, winegrowers, livestock breeders, arboriculturists, horticulturists, nursery gardeners, gardeners, market gardeners, fish farmers, silviculturists, and beekeepers; and
d) the Horeca sector, which covers hoteliers, restaurateurs, and café owners, and the campsite sector."

**Art. 3.**
In Articles 13(2)(b), first indent, and 14(2)(b), first indent, of the Law, the word "three" is replaced by the word "four".

A 690 - 1

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

**Art. 4.**
The following amendments are made to Article 15 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 1, subparagraph 2, is replaced by the following provision:
<< Any water abstraction volume greater than 200 cubic meters per year shall be determined by means of a metering device installed by the user. >>
2. Paragraph 4 is supplemented by a new indent worded as follows:
"— watering troughs in pastures fed by watercourses."

**Art. 5.**
A paragraph 5a, worded as follows, is inserted into Article 16 of the Law:
<< (5a) The discharge tax shall be increased by 50 percent for municipalities that, three years after the approval by the Government in Council of the programmes of measures referred to in Article 28, have not significantly begun the work of implementing or bringing into conformity the overflow structures of the combined sewer system provided for in those programmes.
The discharge tax shall be increased by 100 percent for municipalities that, three years after the programmes of measures referred to in Article 28 have been adopted by the Government in Council, continue to subject their urban wastewater to only mechanical treatment.
The increases shall apply at the earliest three years after the entry into force of this Law. >>

**Art. 6.**
Article 22 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< Art. 22. Prohibitions
It is prohibited to alter the physical, chemical, or biological conditions of surface or ground waters:
1. by throwing, depositing, or introducing, directly or indirectly, voluntarily or involuntarily, into surface or ground waters any polluted, polluting, or potentially polluting solid, liquid, or gaseous substances; this specifically includes:
a) the injection of carbon dioxide streams for the purpose of storage in geological formations that are permanently unsuitable for other uses, provided that such injection is carried out in accordance with the Law of 27 August 2012 on the geological storage of carbon dioxide or is excluded from its scope under Article 2(1) thereof;
b) the injection into groundwater of water containing substances resulting from operations for the prospection and extraction of hydrocarbons or from mining activities, and the injection of water for technical reasons into geological strata from which hydrocarbons or other substances have been extracted or into geological strata that are permanently unsuitable for other uses. Such injections must not contain substances other than those resulting from the operations mentioned in subparagraph a);
c) the injection into groundwater of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) for storage purposes in geological strata that are permanently unsuitable for other uses;
d) the injection into groundwater of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) for storage purposes in other geological strata where there is an overriding need to ensure the gas supply and the injection is carried out in such a way as to prevent any risk of deterioration in the quality of any receiving body of groundwater;

A 690 - 2

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

2. by directly or indirectly abstracting water as well as solid or gaseous substances from surface or ground waters;
3. by modifying the intrinsic characteristics of surface and ground waters by physical agents;
4. by modifying the hydrological regime of surface waters in a way that compromises the environmental flow. >>

**Art. 7.**
The following amendments are made to Article 23(1) of the Law:
1. At the end of point k), the following phrase is added:
<< , with the exception of minor or emergency maintenance work; >>
2. Point l) is deleted;
3. At the end of point o), the following phrase is added:
", as well as between two or more distinct groundwater levels in a manner that increases the potential for groundwater pollution;"
4. Point r) is replaced as follows:
<< r) the reinjection into groundwater of water abstracted from mines and quarries or of water associated with the construction or maintenance of civil engineering works; >>
5. Points s), t), and u), with the following respective wordings, are inserted:
"s) construction, civil engineering, and public works and similar activities on or in the ground that come into contact with groundwater;
t) discharges into groundwater of small quantities of pollutants for scientific purposes for the characterization, protection, or restoration of bodies of water;
u) installations and structures that modify the hydrological regime of surface waters, particularly those intended for the production of hydroelectric power."

**Art. 8.**
The following amendments are made to Article 24 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 4 is replaced as follows:
<< (4) Where the application for authorization concerns an establishment falling within the scope of the amended Law of 10 June 1999 on classified establishments, the application made under that law shall serve as the application file under this Law. In such cases, the Environment Agency has the right to request three additional copies from the applicant, which it shall forward without delay to the Water Management Agency. >>
2. Paragraph 5 is repealed.

**Art. 9.**
The following amendments are made to Article 26 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 1 is replaced as follows:
<< (1) Grand Ducal regulations shall define general requirements to control the adverse impacts on the status of surface and ground waters attributable to diffuse pressures

A 690 - 3

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

or sources, including dispersed point source discharges with low individual effect, in accordance with the provisions of Article 27. >>
2. Paragraph 3 is replaced as follows:
<< (3) Where the land use referred to in paragraph 2(b) relates to agriculture, including the use or spreading of organic fertilizers, mineral fertilizers, plant protection products, or any other product related to agriculture that may be considered a pollutant or a precursor of a pollutant, the general requirements referred to in paragraph 1 may provide for:
a) the limitation or prohibition of the application of these products or substances; or
b) in the case of surface waters, the determination of riparian protection zones in which the use of the aforementioned products or substances may be subject to specific limitations or prohibitions, or in which certain agricultural practices may be prescribed, limited, or prohibited if this is necessary for achieving the environmental objectives referred to in Article 6 in the affected or potentially affected bodies of water. >>

**Art. 10.**
Article 28 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< Art. 28. General provisions on programmes of measures
(1) The Minister shall provide for the establishment, by the Water Management Agency, of one or more programmes of measures to achieve the objectives established under Articles 5 to 7 of this Law. For this purpose, the Minister shall take into account the results of the analysis of the characteristics of the river basin districts referred to in Article 19 and any other elements deemed useful.
(2) The programmes referred to in paragraph 1 shall include basic measures and, if necessary, supplementary measures to be selected from the measures indicated in Articles 29 and 30, as well as, where appropriate, additional measures in accordance with the provisions of Article 31.
The programmes of measures shall be approved by the Government in Council and published in the Official Journal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
(3) The draft programmes of measures shall be submitted by the Minister to the Water Management Committee for its opinion. Upon the expiry of a six-month period from the referral, the absence of an opinion from the Committee may be disregarded.
The draft programmes of measures shall be subject to public consultation in accordance with the provisions of Article 56. >>

**Art. 11.**
Article 30 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< Art. 30. Supplementary measures
Supplementary measures are measures designed and implemented in addition to basic measures in order to achieve the objectives established under Articles 5 to 7.
Supplementary measures include, in particular, the measures listed in Part B of Annex II of this Law.

A 690 - 4

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

**Art. 12.**
The following amendments are made to Article 35 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 1 is replaced by the following provision:
"(1) Any person who causes, or is likely to cause, disturbances to the hydrological regime of a surface water body is required to take appropriate preventive, corrective, or compensatory measures for the regeneration or preservation of the regime of that water body in such a way that:
a) the achievement of the environmental objectives referred to in Article 5 is not compromised;
b) the risks of surface waters overflowing their banks during floods and the damage to persons, property, or the environment attributable to floods are reduced, having regard to the provisions of Article 38;
c) the measures comply respectively with the conditions set in the authorization issued on the basis of Article 23 and with the provisions of Article 26;
d) the environmental flow is guaranteed."
2. Paragraph 4 is replaced by the following provision:
<< (4) Land use plans, general development plans, special development plans, and master plans shall take account of the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2. >>

**Art. 13.**
Article 37 of the Law is replaced as follows:
"<< (1) Projects aimed at the renaturation of watercourses shall be specified in the programme of measures referred to in Article 28.
(2) The implementation of renaturation projects shall be coordinated by the Water Management Agency with the municipalities, inter-municipal syndicates, public establishments, and natural and legal persons involved.
(3) The widening or relocation of a watercourse necessary for renaturation is declared to be in the public interest. In such cases, the expropriation of developed or undeveloped land shall be pursued in accordance with the amended Law of 15 March 1979 on expropriation in the public interest. >>"

**Art. 14.**
Paragraphs 2 to 9 of Article 38 of the Law are replaced as follows:
<< (2) Flood hazard maps shall indicate the geographical areas that are likely to be flooded. The determination of flood hazard zones for floods of given frequencies, namely a high-probability flood with a ten-year return period, a medium-probability flood with a one-hundred-year return period, and a low-probability flood with a one-thousand-year return period, shall be based on a hydrological simulation model. It shall also take into account areas affected by past floods to the extent that these events are documented.
Flood risk maps shall show the potential adverse consequences associated with floods and shall include an assessment of the potential damage to human health, the environment, cultural heritage, and economic activity.
(3) Flood hazard maps shall form an integral part, as an overlay zone, of the general development plans of municipalities, land use plans, special development plans,

A 690 - 5

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

and master plans, as well as of the preparatory study to be presented when drawing up or updating a general development plan.
(4) The management plan or plans referred to in paragraph 1 shall include measures relating to:
a) the conservation or improvement of the hydromorphological structure of watercourse beds to delay the flow of water during floods and to contain high waters;
b) the prevention of erosion of watercourse beds or flooded land;
c) the conservation, creation, or recovery of natural water retention areas; or
d) the regulation of flood flows and the embankment of watercourses.
The flood risk management plan or plans shall take into account relevant aspects such as costs and benefits, flood extent, water conveyance routes, areas with the capacity to retain floodwaters, such as natural floodplains, the environmental objectives referred to in Article 5 of this Law, soil and water management, spatial planning, land use, nature conservation, navigation, and port infrastructure.
(5) The draft flood hazard maps and flood risk maps, as well as the draft flood risk management plan or plans, shall be submitted to the Water Management Committee for its opinion and shall be subject to public consultation in accordance with the provisions of Article 56. Upon the expiry of a three-month period, the absence of an opinion from the Water Management Committee may be disregarded.
(6) Flood hazard maps and flood risk maps shall be declared mandatory by Grand Ducal regulation. The flood risk management plan or plans shall be approved by the Government in Council and published in the Official Journal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
(7) Aspects specified by European Union legislation on flood risk prevention and the elements to be subject to international coordination under Article 4 shall be determined by Grand Ducal regulation.
(8) The municipalities concerned are responsible for implementing the measures included in the management plan or plans.
(9) The costs for carrying out the projects and works shall be borne by the municipalities concerned, without prejudice to their subsidization by the State in accordance with the provisions of Article 65. >>

**Art. 15.**
The following amendments are made to Article 39 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 1 is replaced by the following provision:
<< (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 4, it is prohibited in flood hazard zones determined under Article 38:
a) to define, within the framework of the general development plan, new urbanized areas or areas intended for urbanization in which people may reside or in which installations, structures, or constructions may be built that reduce the retention volume or risk causing damage to persons, property, or the environment;
b) to establish or extend campsites;
c) to establish or extend establishments for the non-permanent accommodation of persons;
d) to establish or extend landfills or deposits.

A 690 - 6

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

2. A paragraph 4a, worded as follows, is inserted:
<< (4a) By way of derogation from the provisions of paragraph 1(c), the establishment of establishments for the non-permanent accommodation of persons, in particular parking areas for motorhomes, may be authorized by the Minister if the flood warning lead time is greater than 12 hours. A Grand Ducal regulation shall set conditions concerning the limitations of use, mandatory equipment, and management of these areas in flood hazard zones. >>

**Art. 16.**
Article 40 of the Law is replaced as follows:
"Art. 40. Hydrological forecasting
(1) The Water Management Agency shall operate a flood forecasting and hydrological regime modelling network for watercourses in order to ensure monitoring during floods and low-water periods.
(2) In the event of a flood, the Water Management Agency shall communicate the data from the hydrological simulation model to the Emergency Services Agency in order to organize the management of the necessary interventions. In parallel, the Water Management Agency is in charge of communicating flood forecasts during flood events."

**Art. 17.**
The following amendments are made to Article 42 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 2 is supplemented as follows:
<< The works, installations, structures, and land takings necessary for the supply of water intended for human consumption are declared to be in the public interest. >>
2. A paragraph 4a, worded as follows, is inserted:
"(4a) A new area intended for urbanization may not be designated and the status of a deferred development zone may not be lifted unless the infrastructure for the supply of water intended for human consumption is guaranteed. A Grand Ducal regulation shall specify the related technical characteristics."
3. Paragraph 5 is replaced by the following provision:
<< (5) The Water Management Agency:
a) is authorized to carry out checks on the quality of the distributed water as well as inspections of the infrastructure in contact with water intended for human consumption;
b) shall be informed in advance by the water supplier of any change in the chemical composition of the water intended for human consumption;
c) may prescribe measures to be taken to restore or improve the qualitative and quantitative status of waters intended for human consumption. >>

**Art. 18.**
Article 44 of the Law is replaced as follows:
"<< Art. 44. Protection zones
(1) Grand Ducal regulations shall delineate protection zones for bodies of water or parts of bodies of water used as a resource for the production of water intended for human consumption.

A 690 - 7

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

These protection zones are subdivided into immediate protection zones, close protection zones, and distant protection zones.
(2) A Grand Ducal regulation shall lay down measures applicable to all protection zones.
(3) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 5, the Grand Ducal regulations referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall prohibit, regulate, or subject to authorization any structures, installations, works, or activities that are likely to adversely affect the quality of the water resource or its exploitable flow. These restrictions concern:
a) the storage, handling, and use of products and substances that may alter water quality;
b) the construction of buildings and roads;
c) the carrying out of industrial, agricultural, commercial, artisanal, and leisure activities;
d) interventions in the subsoil.
(4) The Grand Ducal regulation delineating the protection zones around the Upper Sûre Lake may also contain provisions concerning boats and watercraft placed in the water without authorization or for which the navigation authorization has expired. These watercraft and boats may be removed from the lake and placed in a designated storage facility by the agents listed in Article 58(1). The placing in storage shall be recorded in an official report which includes a brief indication of the circumstances and conditions under which the measure was executed, and which shall be drawn up and transmitted to the State Prosecutor without delay. The costs of removal and placing in storage shall be fixed by the Minister responsible for Justice and shall be accounted for to the benefit of the State by the Registration Duties, Estates and VAT Authority. The owner shall be informed by registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt as soon as the official report has been drawn up. If it is impossible to contact the owner, the boat or watercraft may, with the agreement of the State Prosecutor, be considered abandoned. Abandoned boats and watercraft shall be handed over to the Registration Duties, Estates and VAT Authority. Where they are to be disposed of, this shall be done in the forms established for the sale of movable property. If the watercraft and boats do not find a buyer, they may be delivered for destruction. Boats and watercraft which the official report of the infringement or of the placing in storage has expressly found to constitute wreckage of no appreciable value and for which repair or restoration is clearly physically or economically impossible may be sold without prior observance of the forms established for movable property, or may be delivered for destruction. The aforementioned costs and any fines shall be deducted from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned boat or watercraft occurring under the conditions of this Article. Any surplus shall be paid into the Consignment Fund and held at the disposal of the owner or holder of the boat or watercraft or their successors or assigns. Where the sale amount is less than the amount of these costs and fines, or where the boat or watercraft is destroyed, the owner or holder or their successors or assigns remain liable for this debt to the State; it shall be recovered in the same manner as registration duties.
(5) The protection zone shall compulsorily include an immediate protection zone which houses or is intended to house the water abstraction installations and which is declared to be in the public interest. Within this zone, all structures, installations, deposits, works, or activities are prohibited, with the exception of those relating to the operation and maintenance of the zone and of the abstraction works. Expropriation for the benefit of the State, the municipality, or the syndicate of municipalities that operates these installations shall be pursued in accordance with the amended Law of 15 March 1979 on expropriation in the public interest.
(6) The operator of the abstraction point shall submit an application for the creation of a protection zone to the Minister. If the application is accepted by the Minister, the operator shall draw up a draft plan for the creation of protection zones on the basis of a delineation file established in accordance with the instructions of the Water Management Agency. The file shall be submitted to the Minister, who shall send it, for the purpose of a public inquiry, to the territorially concerned municipalities. The public inquiry procedure must be initiated by the territorially concerned municipalities within two months of receiving the file. The file shall be available for consultation at the municipal hall in the usual manner, while inviting the public concerned to examine the documents for thirty days.
(7) Within the period provided for in the preceding subparagraph, objections to the draft plan must be addressed to the college of the mayor and aldermen, which shall inform the municipal council thereof for its opinion.

A 690-8

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

This file, together with the complaints and the opinion of the municipal council, must be transmitted within one month of the expiry of the publication period to the Minister with the relevant documents and observations.
(8) The effects of the declaration of a protection zone follow the territory concerned, regardless of who holds title to it.
(9) The operator of an abstraction point shall establish a programme of measures concerning the protection zone that extends around that point and which is intended to protect the water to be abstracted. This programme, which must be established in accordance with the provisions of the Grand Ducal regulation made in implementation of paragraph 2, shall be submitted for approval to the Water Management Agency and, within the limits of its powers, to the Administration of Agricultural Technical Services. The Minister may establish a monitoring committee comprising at least one representative of the operator, of the Water Management Agency, and of the Administration of Agricultural Technical Services. Should the operator fail to establish this programme, to modify it at the Minister's request, or to take the measures identified therein, the state aid to which the operator may be entitled under Article 65 shall be refused. >>

**Art. 19.**
In Article 45 of the Law, paragraph 1 is amended as follows:
(1) A body of water or part of a body of water may be declared a water reserve of national interest and preserved for the public supply of water intended for human consumption within the framework of a national strategy defined by the Government in Council, on a proposal from the Minister.

**Art. 20.**
The following amendments are made to Article 46 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 1 is supplemented as follows:
<< The works, installations, structures, and land takings necessary for sanitation, as well as structures for the management of extraneous water and runoff, are declared to be in the public interest. >>
2. Paragraph 3 is supplemented as follows:
"A new area intended for urbanization may not be designated and the status of a deferred development zone may not be lifted unless the sanitation infrastructure is guaranteed. A Grand Ducal regulation shall define the related technical characteristics."
3. The third indent of paragraph 6 is replaced as follows:
<< — provide for the implementation of a system for the periodic monitoring of wastewater collection, disposal, and treatment infrastructure. >>

**Art. 21.**
Article 50 of the Law is repealed.

**Art. 22.**
Article 51 of the Law is repealed.

A 690-9

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

**Art. 23.**
The following amendments are made to Article 52 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 3 is replaced as follows:
<< (3) The draft river basin district management plans shall be submitted to the Water Management Committee for its opinion. Upon the expiry of a six-month period, the absence of an opinion from the Committee may be disregarded. The draft river basin district management plans shall be subject to public consultation in accordance with the provisions of Article 56. >>
2. In paragraph 6, the words "shall be published and declared mandatory by Grand Ducal regulation" are replaced by the following words: "shall be approved by the Government in Council and published in the Official Journal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg".

**Art. 24.**
In Article 53 of the Law, paragraph 1 is replaced as follows:
<< (1) A Water Management Committee is established, whose mission is to make proposals to the government aimed at defining a coordinated approach to be followed in the establishment of river basin district management plans, flood hazard maps, flood risk maps, the flood risk management plan or plans, protection zones, water reserves of national interest, and in monitoring the implementation of this Law. It shall give its opinion on matters submitted to it by the government. >>

**Art. 25.**
The following amendments are made to Article 55 of the Law:
1. The title of Article 55 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< Art. 55. Watercourse partnerships and flood partnerships >>
2. Paragraph 1 is replaced as follows:
"(1) At the initiative of municipalities, syndicates of municipalities, or regularly constituted associations working in the water sector, the Minister is authorized to conclude, in the form of agreements, watercourse partnerships and flood partnerships, respectively, the purpose of which is to involve stakeholders in the water sector and the public with a view to informing and raising their awareness of the integrated and comprehensive management of the water cycle and of flood risk management, respectively."
3. In Article 55 of the Law, paragraph 4 is replaced as follows:
<< The stakeholders who initiate the partnership shall draw up an annual activity report which shall be communicated to the Minister. >>

**Art. 26.**
Article 56 of the Law of 19 December 2008 is replaced as follows:
<< (1) Any interested person may, for three months, consult the draft plans relating to flood hazard maps, flood risk maps, and the flood risk management plan(s) at the municipal hall of the territorially concerned municipalities.

A 690-10

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

This period is extended to six months for draft plans relating to the river basin district management plan and for draft plans relating to the programmes of measures provided for in Article 28.
The draft plans may also be consulted at the website address of the Water Management Agency. This site shall contain the same information as that made available to the public in the municipalities territorially concerned by the said draft plans.
The deposit of the draft plans in the municipal halls as well as the possibility of consulting them on the website of the Water Management Agency shall be announced in a notice published in at least four daily newspapers printed and published in Luxembourg. The aforementioned periods shall begin to run from the day of publication of this notice.
(2) Written observations may be submitted within this same period. They may be submitted either to the college of the mayor and aldermen, which shall forward them to the Minister, or directly to the Minister, who shall take due account of them.
(3) The programmes of measures provided for in Articles 28 to 32, the flood hazard maps, the flood risk maps, the flood risk management plan or plans, and the river basin district management plans may be consulted at the website address of the Water Management Agency.
(4) For the preparation and revision of river basin district management plans, the Minister shall also organize a public consultation including plenary sessions aimed at informing the public of the progress of the work. For the revision of the plans, the consultation shall be launched at least three years before the date on which the plans must have been reviewed and shall concern the timetable and provisional work programme for the preparation of the management plan. At least two years before the date on which the plans must have been reviewed, a consultation on the significant water management issues arising in the river basin districts located within their territory shall be organized. >>

**Art. 27.**
Article 57 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< (1) The Minister shall transmit the draft plans relating to river basin district management plans, flood hazard maps, flood risk maps, and the flood risk management plan(s) to the municipalities concerned for their opinion.
(2) Within a period of four months commencing from the day of communication of the draft plans, the college of the mayor and aldermen shall transmit to the Minister the opinion of the municipal council on the draft plan as a whole and in its implications for the territory of the municipality.
(3) This period is extended to seven months for opinions relating to draft river basin district management plans and to the draft plan relating to the programmes of measures provided for in Article 28. >>

**Art. 28.**
In Article 58 of the Law, paragraph 1 is replaced as follows:
"(1) The director, the deputy director, and civil servants in career groups A1, A2, and B1 of the Water Management Agency, senior-grade civil servants of the Nature and Forest Agency, the director, the deputy directors, and civil servants in career groups A1 and A2 of the Environment Agency, as well as civil servants of the Customs and Excise Agency from the rank of chief superintendent upwards, are responsible for identifying infringements of this Law and of the regulations made for its execution.

A 690 - 11

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

In the exercise of their duties, the so-designated civil servants of the Water Management Agency, the Nature and Forest Agency, the Environment Agency, and the Customs and Excise Agency shall have the capacity of judicial police officer. >>

**Art. 29.**
Article 59 of the Law is replaced by the following text:
<< Art. 59. Powers and prerogatives of inspection
(1) Members of the Grand Ducal Police in the police force and the civil servants referred to in Article 58 shall have access to the watercourses, installations, premises, land, developments, and means of transport subject to this Law and the regulations made for its execution.
Members of the Grand Ducal Police in the police force and the civil servants referred to in Article 58 may access, by day and by night, the watercourses, installations, premises, land, developments, and means of transport subject to this Law and the regulations made for its execution if there are serious indications giving reason to suspect an infringement of this Law or its implementing regulations. The owners, holders, or operators concerned must be given prior notice of the inspection actions in question.
(2) The provisions of paragraph 1 are not applicable to premises used as dwellings. However, and without prejudice to Article 33(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, if there are serious indications giving reason to suspect that the origin of the infringement is in premises intended for habitation, a search of the dwelling may be carried out between six-thirty in the morning and eight in the evening by two judicial police officers, members of the Grand Ducal Police in the police force or civil servants within the meaning of Article 58, acting under a warrant from the investigating judge.
(3) In the exercise of the powers provided for in paragraph 1, members of the Grand Ducal Police in the police force and the civil servants referred to in Article 58 are authorized to:
a) carry out or have carried out tests on equipment or devices likely to cause pollution or intended to combat it;
b) request to receive communication of all books, registers, and files relating to an installation or activity within the meaning of this Law and to take copies thereof;
c) take or have taken, for the purpose of examination or analysis, samples of products, materials, or substances manufactured, used, handled, stored, deposited, or extracted, which may be the source of pollution, as well as of water intended for human consumption and of water which is or may be the subject of pollution or other damage to its ecological, chemical, or quantitative status or its ecological potential;
d) seize and, if necessary, place under seal any craft, equipment, devices, products, materials, or substances that are likely to cause pollution or that are used in the context of work carried out in breach of this Law or its implementing regulations, as well as the documents concerning them.
A part of the sample referred to in point c), stamped or sealed, shall be given to the supplier or recipient of the water, substance, preparation, or article that was the subject of the inspection carried out, unless they expressly waive it or technical reasons preclude it.
(4) Any person subject to the measures provided for in paragraph 3 is required, upon request by members of the Grand Ducal Police in the police force and the civil servants referred to in Article 58, to facilitate the operations which they carry out under this Law. The persons referred to in the preceding subparagraph may be present during the operations.
(5) An official report shall be drawn up of these findings and operations.
(6) The costs incurred by the measures taken under this Article shall be included in the legal costs and shall follow the same outcome.

A 690 - 12

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

**Art. 30.**
In Article 61 of the Law, paragraph 1 is replaced as follows:
<< (1) The following shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of eight days to six months and a fine of 251 euros to 750,000 euros, or by one of these penalties only:
a) anyone who, in breach of Article 22, alters the physical, chemical, or biological conditions of surface and ground waters;
b) anyone who, in breach of Article 23(1), fails to subject the installations, structures, deposits, activities, and measures referred to therein to authorization;
c) anyone who, in breach of Article 23(3), continues to operate the installations and structures or carry out the works or activities when the relevant authorization has lapsed;
d) anyone who, in breach of Article 23(5), fails to comply with the measures referred to therein;
e) anyone who, in breach of Article 23(7), fails to apply for authorization for a building connection to the public sewerage system, when the water from this building is not produced by human metabolism and household activities;
f) anyone who, in breach of Article 24(3), fails to declare any cessation referred to therein;
g) anyone who, in breach of Article 26, fails to comply with the general requirements referred to therein;
h) anyone who, in breach of Article 35(1), fails to take the preventive, corrective, or compensatory measures referred to therein;
i) anyone who, in breach of Article 39(1), carries out prohibited developments or extensions;
j) anyone who, in breach of Article 42(4), fails to ensure the avoidance of contamination of the public network;
k) anyone who, in breach of Article 44(3), fails to comply with the measures referred to therein;
l) anyone who, in breach of Article 44(5), puts in place prohibited structures, installations, or deposits, or carries out prohibited works or activities;
m) anyone who, in breach of Article 44(9), fails to establish a programme of measures;
n) anyone who, in breach of Article 46(2), fails to connect to a sanitation infrastructure;
o) anyone who, in breach of Article 48(1), carries out disposal or treatment that does not comply with the required discharge authorization;
p) anyone who, in breach of Article 60, fails to comply with the emergency measures provided for therein. >>

**Art. 31.**
The Law is supplemented by an Article 61a, worded as follows:
<< Art. 61a. Administrative fines
(1) The Minister may impose an administrative fine of 25 euros to 1,000 euros on:
a) anyone who, in breach of Article 36(5), fails to provide for the maintenance of surface waters;
b) anyone who, in breach of Article 39(3), carries out reinforcing works or repairs to existing constructions, when their ground footprint is increased;
c) anyone who, in breach of Article 39(4a), fails to comply with the requirements applicable in zones designated for the non-permanent accommodation of persons;
d) anyone who, in breach of Article 42(4), fails to ensure the maintenance of a private installation for the supply of water intended for human consumption;
e) anyone who, in breach of Article 45(2), fails to comply with the requirements applicable in water reserves of national interest;
f) anyone who, in breach of Article 46(4), fails to submit the technical file provided for therein within the required time limit;
g) anyone who, in breach of Article 46(5), fails to submit the modification, extension, or renewal projects provided for therein;

A 690 - 13

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

h) anyone who, in breach of Article 48(3), fails to provide the data and information referred to therein.
(2) The fines are payable within thirty days of the notification of the written decision, notwithstanding the exercise of any right of appeal. After this period, a reminder shall be sent by registered mail. The reminder shall give rise to late payment interest calculated at the legal rate.
(3) Administrative fines shall be collected by the Registration Duties, Estates and VAT Authority. Recovery shall be carried out as in matters of registration duties.
(4) An appeal on the merits against decisions taken under this Article may be brought before the Administrative Tribunal. This appeal must be lodged within a period of forty days from the notification of the decision, on pain of forfeiture. >>

**Art. 32.**
Article 65 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< (1) The Minister is authorized to charge to the fund:
a) the coverage of up to 100 percent of the expenditure relating to projects recognized as being of national interest by the Government in Council and aimed at safeguarding the quality of ground and surface waters; during a transition phase of two years corresponding to the establishment of a subsidizable programme of measures in accordance with point h) of this Article, coverage of 75 percent of the expenditure linked to agricultural advisory services for farmers located in the protection zones around groundwater abstraction points may be recognized as being of national interest by the Government in Council;
1. sanitation and wastewater treatment;
2. the protection and restoration of watercourses to a near-natural state;
3. the reduction of flood risks;
4. the sustainable use of water, based on the long-term protection of available water resources;
b) the coverage of up to 100 percent of the expenditure relating to works carried out on border watercourses and presenting a cross-border interest;
c) the coverage of up to 100 percent of the expenditure relating to the preparation of feasibility studies, pollutant load calculations, hydrological calculations and data validation, project management assignments, the establishment of technical guides, the improvement of the watercourse monitoring network, and general concepts in the various fields of water protection and management listed in point a);
d) the coverage of up to 50 percent of the cost of investments relating to:
i) the implementation of new municipal infrastructure for wastewater disposal and treatment, including the construction and technical and financial supervision of the implementation of collector systems, treatment plants, and water retention basins, including their ancillary technical structures;
ii) the adaptation of existing municipal treatment plants to new treatment technologies aimed at increased sanitation performance and to stricter standards imposed on them in accordance with national and international water quality objectives;
iii) study costs, including the assessment of the structural and operational condition of the existing infrastructure necessary for the implementation of the related measures, as well as the technical files referred to in Article 46;
e) the coverage of up to 50 percent of the cost of studies and investments corresponding to the implementation of works to be carried out on municipal pipe and collection networks with a view to eliminating extraneous water, i.e., permanently flowing unpolluted water

A 690 - 14

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

such as spring water, groundwater, or drainage water, as well as unpolluted runoff from surfaces outside the serviced urban area;
f) the coverage of up to 33 percent of the costs of studies and investments relating to the implementation of rainwater collection networks and structures for the management of rainwater from surfaces within urban areas equipped with a separate collection system for urban wastewater;
g) the coverage of up to 50 percent of the costs of the study for the delineation of protection zones when the preparation begins no later than one year after the submission of the application for creation provided for in Article 44(4). For studies that begin between three and five years after the submission of the application for creation, the coverage may not exceed 25 percent of the costs of the study for the delineation of protection zones. Only delineation files for which the abstraction point supplies a public distribution network and for which the abstraction point has an authorization in accordance with the provisions of Article 23 are eligible;
h) the coverage of up to 75 percent of the costs linked to the development and implementation of programmes of measures aimed at protecting water resources intended for human consumption in accordance with the provisions of Articles 44 and 45;
i) the coverage of up to 50 percent of new inter-municipal infrastructure of regional scope for the distribution of water intended for human consumption;
j) the coverage of up to 100 percent of the cost of works for the restoration and renaturation of watercourses, as well as the costs of studies and the costs of land acquisitions necessary for carrying out these works, apart from any compensatory measure granted within the framework of an authorization under the amended Law of 19 January 2004 on the protection of nature and natural resources;
k) the coverage of up to 90 percent of the cost of measures intended to reduce the effects of floods, and up to 100 percent of the cost of related studies and expenses;
l) the coverage of up to 75 percent of the cost of development and maintenance works carried out on watercourses;
m) the coverage of up to 50 percent of the cost of infrastructure works as well as the costs of studies and related expenses for other projects in the various fields of water protection and management listed in point a);
n) the coverage of up to 100 percent of the cost of research work aimed at improving technical and scientific knowledge on the aquatic environment and the best available techniques in the field of the urban water cycle;
o) the coverage of up to 100 percent of the cost of carrying out pilot projects illustrating the applicability of new technologies in the field of water management.
(2) A State administration may be the project owner for the projects referred to in points a) to c) as well as j) and m) to o) of paragraph 1.
Municipalities, syndicates of municipalities, and public establishments are eligible for the coverage provided for in points d) to o) of paragraph 1.
Natural and legal persons under private law are eligible, according to the criteria set out in Annex IV, for the coverage provided for in points f) and j) to l) of paragraph 1, with the exception of the coverage of costs relating to the acquisition of land necessary for the implementation of the measures referred to therein."

**Art. 33.**
The following amendments are made to Article 66 of the Law:
1. Paragraph 1 is replaced as follows:
<< (1) Aid allocated under Article 65 may only be committed and paid within the limits of the fund's resources. >>
2. Paragraph 2 is worded as follows:
"(2) The commitment of expenditure chargeable to the Water Management Fund is subject to the prior approval of the projects by the Minister, after seeking the opinion of the Water Management Fund Committee.

A 690 - 15

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

An authorization issued by the Minister under the provisions of Articles 23 or 24 is considered as prior approval.
For the coverage referred to in points d) and i) of Article 65, only municipalities whose water pricing complies with the provisions of Chapter 2, Section 2 of this Law are eligible. Where the application for coverage comes from a syndicate of municipalities on behalf of one or more of its member municipalities, the syndicate is only eligible for the municipality or municipalities whose water pricing complies with the provisions of Chapter 2, Section 2 of this Law."

**Art. 34.**
The following amendments are made to Article 69 of the Law:
1. In the first sentence, the words "for at least three years" are deleted.
2. The Article is supplemented as follows:
<< The same applies to associations and organizations under foreign law endowed with legal personality which carry out their statutory activities in the field of environmental protection. >>

**Art. 35.**
Article 71 of the Law is replaced as follows:
<< (1) Authorization applications submitted before the entry into force of this Law remain subject to the legal provisions in force at the time of their submission, with the exception of authorization applications for quarries, mines, and open-cast mines submitted in application of Article 12 of the amended Law of 29 July 1993 on the protection and management of water.
(2) The operators and project owners of installations, structures, or activities not subject to authorization before the entry into force of this Law have a period of twelve months to submit an authorization application on the basis of the provisions of this Law. If after a further period of six months, the installations, structures, or activities have not been authorized, they are automatically suspended until the required authorization is issued.
(3) The Grand Ducal regulations made in implementation of the legislation repealed in application of Article 72 shall remain in force as long as they have not been replaced by new provisions and provided that they are not contrary to the provisions of this Law.
(4) In municipalities where the pollutant load of more than one-third of the average population equivalents is discharged into the natural environment, the amount of the wastewater discharge tax is increased by 1.50 euros per cubic meter of water taken from the public distribution system.
(5) For files related to wastewater sanitation and eligible for a state contribution in accordance with Article 65(1)(d), the following transitional measures apply:
a) coverage of 65 percent will remain applicable for files whose detailed project plans were submitted before 1 January of the year following that of the entry into force of this Law to the secretariat of the Water Management Fund;
b) coverage of 75 percent will remain applicable for files whose detailed project plans were submitted before 1 July 2015 to the secretariat of the Water Management Fund and for which the related preliminary study had been submitted before 20 October 2014;
c) coverage of 90 percent will remain applicable for files whose detailed project plans were submitted before 1 July 2015 to the secretariat of the Water Management Fund and for which the related preliminary study had been submitted before 1 October 2010;
d) files submitted before the entry into force of this Law but not yet committed and which do not fall within the scope of points a), b), or c) of this paragraph will remain eligible at the rate in force at the time of their submission to the secretariat of the Water Management Fund;

A 690 - 16

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

e) for commitments made before the entry into force of this Law, and benefiting from a rate referred to in paragraph 5, points a), b), or c), this rate is applicable only provided that the related works have been put out to tender within twenty-four months following the entry into force. After this period, the provisions of Article 65(1)(d) are applicable.
(6) Projects in the process of being carried out at the time of the entry into force of this Law and benefiting from aid rates from the State revenue and expenditure budget and decided upon before the date of entry into force of this Law, shall continue to benefit from this aid in accordance with the commitments made. >>

A 690-17

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

**Art. 36.**
In Annex I of the Law, Part A is amended as follows:
"Annex (I-Part A)

[MAP IMAGE]

MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

Legend
A Chiers Basin
A Moselle Basin
Watershed divide
Sûre
Syre
Attert
Belgium
Eisch
France
Waltz
Wark
Mamer
Ernz Blanc
Germany
Scale: 1:500,000

A 690-18

OFFICIAL JOURNAL of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg MÉMORIAL A - 690 of 3 August 2017

**Art. 37.**
In Annex II of the Law of 19 December 2008, the title of Part B is amended as follows:
<< PART B
Non-exhaustive list of supplementary measures that may be included in the programme of measures >>

**Art. 38.**
An Annex IV, worded as follows, is inserted into the Law:
<< << ANNEX IV: CRITERIA FOR COVERAGE BENEFITING NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS UNDER PRIVATE LAW
In accordance with Article 65(1), natural and legal persons under private law are eligible, according to the following criteria, for the coverage provided for in points f) and j) to l) of paragraph 1, with the exception of costs relating to the acquisition of land necessary for the implementation of the measures referred to therein:
1. on the basis of Article 65(1)(f), they are eligible for coverage of 33 percent provided that the infrastructure referred to therein, located within a general development plan, is implemented in the public domain or transferred to the municipality within the framework of the implementation of a special development project in accordance with the provisions of the amended Law of 19 July 2004 on municipal planning and urban development. This coverage is increased, with regard to studies, by 10 percent of the amount of the eligible works;
2. on the basis of Article 65(1)(j):
a) they are eligible for coverage of 100 percent for measures to ensure fish passage carried out for the purpose of achieving the environmental objectives for surface waters within the meaning of Article 5;
b) they are eligible for coverage of 100 percent for projects for the restoration and renaturation of watercourses carried out in protected areas of Community interest and protected areas of national interest within the meaning of Chapters 5 and 6 of the amended Law of 19 January 2004 on the protection of nature and natural resources, and for coverage of 90 percent for all other projects for the restoration and renaturation of watercourses;
3. on the basis of Article 65(1)(k), they are eligible for coverage of 90 percent of the cost of flood control measures and 100 percent for the costs of related studies;
4. on the basis of Article 65(1)(l), they are eligible for coverage of 75 percent of the cost of development works carried out on watercourses and 50 percent for maintenance works on watercourses. >>>

We command and order that this Law be inserted into the Official Journal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg to be executed and observed by all those whom it may concern.

The Minister for the Environment,
Carole Dieschbourg

Cabasson, 20 July 2017.
Henri

Parl. Doc. 7047; ord. sess. 2015-2016 and 2016-2017.

A 690 - 19

