

--- PAGE 1 ---

(Published 19th April, 2013)
ACT
No. 2 of 2013
I assent
DR. JOYCE BANDA
PRESIDENT
9th April, 2013
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
SECTION
PART I__PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
1.
Short title and commencement
2.
Interpretation
3.
Application of the Act
4.
Objectives
5.
Water vested in the State
6.
Public ownership of beds and banks of watercourses and
lakes and of adjacent land strips
7.
Powers and duties of the Minister
PART II__NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES AUTHORITY
8.
Establishment of the Authority
9.
Disclosure of interest
10.
Powers and functions of the Authority
11.
Committees of the Authority
12.
Invited persons
13.
Regional offices
14.
Staff of the Authority
15.
Delegation of powers and functions
16.
Water resources investigation
17.
Authority’s powers to require records, etc.
18.
National monitoring of, and information on, water resources
management
19.
Sources of funds
20.
Application of revenue from permit charges and licence fees
21.
Investment powers of the Authority
No. 2
Water Resources
1


--- PAGE 2 ---

SECTION
22.
Financial year of the Authority
23.
Annual reports
24.
Progress reports
PART III__CATCHMENT MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
25.
Catchment areas
26.
Establishment of catchment management committees
27.
Procedure for establishment of catchment management
committees
28.
Composition of a catchment management committee
29.
Functions of catchment management committees
30.
Authority to assist catchment management committees
31.
Funding and auditing of activities of catchment management
committees
32.
Catchment Management Strategy
33.
Sensitization of users of watercourses on protection and
management of watercourses and other bodies
PART IV__NATIONAL WATER POLICY AND NATIONAL WATER
RESOURCES MASTER PLAN
34.
National Water Policy
35.
National Water Resources Master Plan
36.
Action Plan to be adhered to
PART V__WATER ABSTRACTION AND USE
37.
Reservation of water resource
38.
Abstraction of water for domestic use, use of groundwater,
and rainwater harvesting
39.
Abstraction and use of water subject to licence
40.
Application for licence
41.
Criteria for issuing a licence
42.
Contents of the licence
43.
Terms and conditions of licence
44.
Reference of licences to other authorities
45.
Exemption of works
46.
Issue of temporary licence
47.
Licence conditional on inspection of works
48.
Licensee to inform Authority of change of location of water
use
49.
Variation of a licence owing to change in circumstances,
etc.
50.
Cancellation of a licence
51.
Cancellation or variation of a licence for a public purpose
2
Water Resources
No. 2


--- PAGE 3 ---

SECTION
52.
Variation of licence following change in flows
53.
Variation of a licence at request of licensee
54.
Effects of expiry or cancellation of a licence to abstract and
use water
55.
Lease of licence to abstract and use water
56.
Succession to a licence to abstract and use water
57.
Abandonment of permitted or licensed activities
58.
Surrender of licence
59.
Register of licences
60.
Combined licence to abstract and use water and to discharge
effluent
61.
Duration of a licence to abstract and use water
62.
Renewal of a licence to abstract and use water
63.
Right to transfer saved water
64.
Easements for works
65.
Emergency powers in case of shortage of water
PART VI__CONTROL AND PROTECTION OF GROUNDWATER
66.
Groundwater conservation areas
67.
Issuing of licence not guarantee to supply of water
68.
Permit to drill a borehole or to engage in borehole drilling
programme for groundwater exploration
69.
Submission of records
70.
Tests on neighbouring boreholes
71.
Contractor deemed to be constructor
72.
Records may be required to be treated as confidential
73.
Waste of groundwater
74.
Contamination and pollution of groundwater
75.
Authority may order special measures to safeguard ground-
water resources
76.
Artesian boreholes to be cased
77.
Defective boreholes
78.
Interference with defective borehole, etc.
79.
Application to carry out work on a defective borehole
80.
Instructions to deal with defective borehole
81.
Authority may inspect borehole
82.
Sworn statements to be submitted
83.
Additional work on defective borehole
84.
Licensing of borehole drillers and constructors
PART VII__PROTECTED AREAS AND CONTROLLED ACTIVITIES
85.
Protected areas
86.
Controlled areas in relation to drought
87.
Controlled activities
No. 2
Water Resources
3


--- PAGE 4 ---

SECTION
PART VIII__PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF WATER POLLUTION
88.
Prohibition of pollution
89.
Pollution of water resources from an activity or process
90.
Declaration of prohibited substances by the Authority
91.
Standard of effluent quality
92.
Application for effluent discharge permit
93.
Contents of the permit
94.
Terms and conditions of a discharge permit
95.
Reference of permits to other authorities
96.
Duration of permit to discharge effluent
97.
Renewal of permit to discharge effluent
98.
Review of permit to discharge effluent
99.
Transfer of permit to discharge effluent
100. Succession to permit to discharge effluent
101. Suspension and cancellation of permit to discharge effluent
102. Effects of expiry or cancellation of permit to discharge
effluent
103 Pollution of water resources from spillage
PART IX__GOVERNMENT WATERWORKS
104. Powers of Authority to undertake works
105. State schemes and community projects
106. Precedence of schemes and projects
107. Construction of works for state schemes
108. Community projects
109. Contribution towards schemes and projects
PART X__SAFETY OF DAMS AND FLOOD MANAGEMENT
110. Definitions
111. Blockage of watercourses
112 Control measures for dams with safety risk
113. Responsibilities of approved professional persons
114. Registration of dams with safety risk
115. Factors to be considered in declaring dams with safety risk
116. Exemptions
117. Regulations regarding dam safety and prevention of flood
risk
118. Measures for flood mitigation and control
PART XI__WATER CHARGES AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
119. Charges
120. Collection and use of water fees and charges
4
Water Resources
No. 2


--- PAGE 5 ---

SECTION
121. Water Resources Trust Fund
PART XII__WATER TRIBUNAL
122. Establishment of Water Tribunal
123. Composition of the Tribunal
124. Vacancy in the office of a member of the Water Tribunal
125. Support staff and funds of the Water Tribunal
126. Indemnity of the Tribunal and its members
127. Jurisdiction of the Water Tribunal
128. Time for lodging appeal
129. Determination of appeals and disputes
130. Rules and procedures of the Water Tribunal
PART XIII__ASSOCIATIONS OF WATER USERS
131. Establishment and purposes of associations of water users
132. Approval and registration of associations of water users
133. Registration of associations of water users, compulsory
membership implied
134. Register of associations of water users
135. Power of Authority to give directions
136. Disestablishment of associations of water users
137. Winding-up of affairs of associations of water users
PART XIV__MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
138. Entry by Authority for monitoring of water resources
139. Obligations on entry on land
140. Inspection of land in relation to water use
141. Establishment
of
bodies
to
implement
international
agreements
142. General appeals
143. General offence and penalty
144. Specific offences
145. Miscellaneous offences
146. Proceedings for offences
147. Penalties for offences
148. Administrative penalties
149. Offences by bodies corporate relating to state of mind
150. Offences by bodies corporate relating to liability of
directors
151. Penalties for offences by bodies corporate
152. Damage caused by the Minister, etc., to be compensated
153. Prescribed guidelines
No. 2
Water Resources
5


--- PAGE 6 ---

SECTION
154. Decision to be in regard to objectives
155. Protection of the Minister and others from liability
156. Public consultation
157. Regulations
PART XV__REPEALS, SAVINGS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
158. Transitional provisions
159. Notification of existing rights
160. Authority to record existing rights and to issue licence
161. Application of other relevant laws
162. Repeal and savings
An Act to provide for the management, conservation, use and
control of water resources; for the acquisition and regulation of
rights to use water; and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto
ENACTED by the Parliament of Malawi as follows__
PART I__PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
1.
This Act may be cited as the Water Resources Act, 2013, and
shall come into operation on such date as the Minister shall appoint
by notice published in the Gazette.
2.__(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires__
“aquifer” includes a geological structure or formation and an
artificial landfill permeated or capable of being permeated
permanently or intermittently with water;
“Authority” means the National Water Resources Authority
established under section 8;
“authorized” means authorized by or under this Act;
“authorized person” means a person acting on behalf of the
Minister or the Authority to whom powers have been delegated
under section 15 and includes an officer, servant or agent of an
authority or any person acting on behalf of the authority;
“borehole” includes a borehole, well, excavation or other
opening in the ground or any natural or artificially constructed or
improved underground cavity which is used__
(a) for intercepting, collecting, obtaining or using ground
water; or
6
Water Resources
No. 2
Short title and
commence-
ment
Interpretation


--- PAGE 7 ---

(b) for disposing of any water or waste below the surface of
the ground;
“catchment”, in relation to a watercourse or any part thereof,
means the area from which any rainfall will drain into, the
watercourse or part of the watercourse through surface flow to a
common point;
“catchment management committee” means a committee
established under section 26;
“catchment area” means an area designated as such under
section 25;
“charges”, in relation to the use of water from a water resource,
includes fees, levies and premiums of any kind;
“construct” includes alter, improve, maintain and repair;
“domestic purposes” includes the provision of water for
household and sanitary purposes and for the watering and dipping
of stock;
“domestic sewage” includes faecal matter, urine, household
slops and other liquid house refuse;
“domestic use” includes use for the purpose of__
(a) human consumption, washing and cooking by persons
ordinarily resident on the land where the use occurs;
(b) watering not more than thirty livestock units;
(c) irrigating a subsistence garden; and
(d) watering a subsistence fish pond;
“easement” means a right to enter a land owned or occupied by
another person for all or any of the following purposes__
(a) to construct works on or in that land;
(b) to store water on or in that land; or
(c) to carry water, drainage or waste under, through or over
that land;
“enclosed spring water” means water in a spring which__
(a) is situated wholly within the boundaries of the land
owned by any one landholder; and
(b) does not naturally discharge water into a watercourse
abutting on, or extending beyond, the boundaries of that land;
“effluent” means any liquid discharged as a result of domestic,
commercial, industrial or agricultural activities;
“environment” means all aspects of the surroundings of
humans, including the physical, biological, economic, cultural
and social aspects;
No. 2
Water Resources
7


--- PAGE 8 ---

“existing right” means any right to abstract and use water or to
discharge effluent__
(a) which at the commencement of this Act was lawfully
acquired, is possessed by, and is being exercised by, any
person; or
(b) lawfully acquired by any person before the commence-
ment of the Act for the purpose of supplying water to the
public;
“hydrological station” includes a gauging, recording or
monitoring station or an investigation or monitoring borehole or
ancillary works constructed or installed on land;
“inspector” means a person appointed by the Minister or the
Authority to exercise the powers of an inspector under this Act;
“in-stream habitat” includes the physical structure of a water
resource and the associated vegetation in relation to the bed of the
water course;
“ground water” means the water of underground streams,
channels, artesian basins, reservoirs, lakes and other bodies of
water in the ground, and includes water in interstices below the
water table;
“land” includes premises;
“landholder”, in relation to land, means the registered owner of
the land or the person in whom the land is otherwise vested by,
and includes__
(a) any person who by any established right, custom or estate
whatsoever is, or is entitled to be, the holder or possessor of
land;
(b) any person lawfully holding or occupying land in
accordance with the provisions of any law empowering the
allotment of land upon the promise of title, subject to the
fulfilment by the allottee of prescribed conditions; and
(c) any person to whom a mining lease or mining location
has been granted under the Mines and Minerals Act;
“licence” means a licence issued under this Act;
“livestock unit” means a mature animal with a live weight of
250 kilograms and for purposes of this definition__
(a) one head of cattle shall be deemed to be 0.7;
(b) one horse shall be deemed to be 0.6;
(c) one donkey shall be deemed to be 0.4;
(d) one goat shall be deemed to be 0.15;
8
Water Resources
No. 2
Cap. 61:01


--- PAGE 9 ---

(e) one sheep shall be deemed to be 0.15,
of a livestock unit;
“natural resources” means land, soil and water in their physical
aspects together with the natural vegetation associated therewith,
and the normal balance between them;
“occupier” means any person in occupation of the land or any
part of the land or premises;
“owner” includes__
(a) the person for the time being receiving the rent of the
land in connection with which the word is used, whether on his
own account or as agent or trustee for any other person; or
(b) the person who would receive the rent if the land were let
to a tenant;
“permit” means a permit issued under this Act;
“pollute”, in relation to water, means directly or indirectly to
alter the physical, thermal, chemical, biological or radioactive
properties of any water so as to render the water less fit for any
beneficial purpose for which it is, or may reasonably be, used or
to cause a condition which is hazardous or potentially hazardous
to public health, safety or welfare, or to animals, birds, fish or
aquatic life or other organisms or to plants; and “pollution” has a
corresponding meaning;
“premises” includes any building or structure whether of a
temporary or permanent nature and any vehicle or vessel;
“public consultation”, in relation to any application made, or
action proposed to be taken, under this Act, has the meaning
assigned to it in section 156;
“regional office” means an office of the Authority established
under section 13;
“reserve”, in relation to a water resource, means that quantity
and quality of water required__
(a) to satisfy basic human needs for all people who are or
may be supplied from the water resource; and
(b) to protect aquatic ecosystems in order to secure ecologi-
cally sustainable development and use of the water resource;
“resource quality”, in relation to a water resource, means the
quality of all the aspects of a water resource including__
(a) the water quality stipulated for the reserve;
(b) the quantity, pattern, timing, water level and assurance of
in-stream flow;
No. 2
Water Resources
9


--- PAGE 10 ---

(c) the physical, chemical and biological characteristics of
the water;
(d) the charter and condition of the in-stream and riparian
habitat; and
(e) the characteristics, condition and distribution of the
aquatic biota;
“riparian habitat” means the dynamic complex of plant, animal
and
micro-organism
communities
and
their
non-living
environment adjacent to and associated with a watercourse;
“shared waters” means such water resources as form, or
are traversed by, the boundaries of Malawi with any of its
neighbouring states;
“spring” means water emerging from beneath the surface of the
ground otherwise than as a result of drilling or excavation
operations;
“stream” means the water contained in a watercourse, and
includes a river;
“subsistence fish pond” means a fish pond appurtenant to, or
used in connection with, a dwelling or group of dwellings for
subsistence of its residents, the produce of which is predomi-
nantly consumed by the residents and is not sold or bartered;
“subsistence garden” means a garden, not exceeding 0.5
hectare in area, appurtenant to, or used in connection with, a
dwelling or group of dwellings for the subsistence of its residents,
the produce of which is predominantly consumed by the residents
and is not sold or bartered;
“surface water” means water flowing, stored or found on the
surface of the ground;
“swamp” means any shallow depression on which water
collects either intermittently or permanently and where there is a
small depth of surface water or a shallow depth of ground water
and a slight range of fluctuation either in the surface level of the
water or of the ground water level so as to permit the growth of
aquatic vegetation;
“underground water” means water naturally stored or flowing
below the surface of the ground and not necessarily apparent on
the surface of the ground;
“use”, in relation to water, includes to withdraw, pump, extract,
take, use or reuse or to divert for the purpose of using or reusing
that water;
10
Water Resources
No. 2


--- PAGE 11 ---

“water” includes__
(a) water flowing or situated upon the surface of any land;
(b) water flowing or contained in__
(i) any river, stream, watercourse or other natural course
for water;
(ii) any lake, pond, swamp, marsh or spring, whether or
not it has been altered or artificially improved;
(c) ground water;
(d) such other water as the Minister may, from time to time,
declare to be water;
“Water Tribunal” means the Water Tribunal established under
section 122;
“water resource” means any lake, pond, swamp, marsh, stream,
watercourse, estuary, aquifer, artesian basin or other body of
flowing or standing water, whether above or below ground;
“water right” subject to the provisions of section 38, includes
any existing right;
“water table” means__
(a) in pervious granular or detrital material, the upper
surface of the body of free water which fills all openings in
material that is sufficiently pervious to permit percolation; and
(b) in fractured impervious rocks and in solution openings,
the surface at the contact between the water body in the
openings and the overlying ground air;
“watercourse” means any natural channel or depression in
which water flows regularly or intermittently;
“works” means any structure, apparatus, contrivance, device or
thing for carrying, conducting, providing or utilizing water or
liquid waste, but does not include hand utensils or such other
contrivances as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2) In interpreting this Act, an interpretation which promotes the
objectives of the Act shall be preferred to one which does not.
3.
The Minister may, from time to time, by notice published in
the Gazette declare part of this Act not to apply to an area defined
in the notice for a purpose defined in the action plan.
4.
The objectives of the Act are__
(a) to promote the rational management and use of the water
resources of Malawi through__
No. 2
Water Resources
11
Application
of the Act
Objectives


--- PAGE 12 ---

(i)
the
progressive
introduction
and
application
of
appropriate standards and techniques for the investigation, use,
control, protection, management and administration of water
resources;
(ii) the regulation of all public and private activities which
may influence the quality, quantity, distribution, use or
management of water resources;
(iii)
the
coordination,
allocation
and
delegation
of
responsibilities among Ministers and public authorities for the
investigation, use, control, protection, management or adminis-
tration of water resources;
(b) to allow for the orderly development and use of water
resources for all purposes including domestic use, the watering of
stock, irrigation and agriculture, industrial, commercial and
mining uses, the generation of hydroelectric or geothermal
energy, navigation, fishing, preservation of flora and fauna and
recreation in ways which minimize harmful effects to the
environment; and
(c) to control pollution and to promote the safe storage,
treatment, discharge and disposal of waste and effluents which
may pollute water or otherwise harm the environment and human
health.
5.
All water resources are hereby vested in the State,
subject to any rights of a user granted by or under this Act or any
other written law.
6.__(1) The bed and banks of watercourses and lakes and the
adjacent land strips are declared public land and the Authority shall
determine and regulate the management thereof.
(2) No person shall cultivate or carry out any activity within the
bed and banks of watercourses and lakes and their adjacent land
strips except as determined by the Authority under subsection (1).
(3) The Minister, in consultation with the relevant authorities,
shall determine the width of the land which is subject to this section.
(4) The Minister, in consultation with the relavant authorities,
shall facilitate payment of compensation for loss of property within
any land which is a subject matter of this section.
(5) Any person who contravenes subsection (2) commits an
offence.
7.__(1) The Minister shall, in accordance with this Act have, and
may, exercise control over every water resource.
12
Water Resources
No. 2
Water vested
in the State
Public owner-
ship of beds
and banks of
watercourses
and lakes and
of adjacent
land strips
Powers and
duties of the
Minister


--- PAGE 13 ---

(2) The Minister shall promote the investigation, conservation
and proper use of water resources throughout Malawi and ensure the
effective exercise and performance by any authorities or persons
under the control of the Minister of their powers and duties in
relation to water.
(3) The Minister shall be assisted in the discharge of his duties
under this section by the Authority established under this Act.
PART II__NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES AUTHORITY
8.__(1) There is hereby established an Authority to be known as
the National Water Resources Authority.
(2) The Authority shall be__
(a) a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common
seal;
(b) have power, in and by its corporate name, to sue and be
sued; and
(c) in the exercise and performance of its powers and functions,
to do and permit all such things as may lawfully be done or
permitted by a body corporate in furtherance of its objects.
(3) The powers and functions of the Authority shall be exercised
and performed under the direction of a governing board, which shall
consist of__
(a) The following members appointed by the Minister__
(i) a representative of one of the established catchment
management committees;
(ii) one representative of associations of water users;
(iii) one representative of a non-governmental organization
(NGO) engaged in the water sector; and
(iv) one member as the Minister may, in his discretion,
appoint from the private sector as representing key private
sector stakeholders.
(b) the following ex-officio members__
(i) the Secretary responsible for water development or his
designated representative;
(ii) the Secretary responsible for health, or his designated
representative;
(iii) the Secretary responsible for tourism, or his designated
representative;
(iv) the Secretary responsible for agriculture, or his
designated representative;
(v) the Secretary responsible for irrigation, or his designated
representative;
No. 2
Water Resources
13
Establish-
ment of the
Authority


--- PAGE 14 ---

(vi) the Secretary responsible for land matters, or his
designated representative;
(vii) the Secretary responsible for natural resources, or his
designated representative;
(viii) the Secretary responsible for environment, or his
designated representative; and
(ix) the Secretary responsible for transport, or his designated
representative;
(4) In making the appointments, other than of the ex-officio
members, the Minister shall have regard to__
(a)
the
educational
qualifications,
experience,
expertise,
character and integrity of potential candidates for membership;
and
(b) the degree to which water users, or water users of
particular kinds, are represented on the board at the time the
appointment is made.
(5) A member, other than an ex-officio member, shall hold office
for a period of three years and may be eligible for re-appointment
from time to time.
(6) The Minister shall designate one member who is not a public
officer to be the Chairperson of the Authority.
(7) Members of the Authority shall elect from amongst their
number a Vice-Chairperson.
(8) An appointment under this section may be revoked, by the
person or his successor in office, who made the appointment.
(9) For the purposes of this section, a vacancy in the office of
Chairperson shall be deemed to be an absence from office of the
Chairperson.
(10) The terms and conditions of service of a member, including
the remuneration, allowances and other expenses to which he is
entitled, shall be as determined by the Authority and approved by
the Minister.
(11) The office of a member shall become vacant if__
(a) he dies, resigns or is removed from office;
(b) he absents himself, without valid reasons, from three
consecutive meetings of the Authority of which he has had notice;
(c) he is adjudged bankrupt;
(d) he is adjudged or declared, by any competent court or
tribunal, to be of unsound mind; or
(e) he is convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment
without an option of a fine.
14
Water Resources
No. 2


--- PAGE 15 ---

(12) On vacation of office by a member, the vacancy shall be
filled by a person appointed in accordance with the relevant
provision of section 8 (3) under which the former member was
appointed:
Provided that if the remaining period is less than six months, the
Minister may decide not to have the vacancy filled until the expiry
of the period.
(13) The Authority shall meet at least four times in every year.
(14) Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act__
(a) meetings of the Authority shall be held at such times and
places as are fixed by the Chairperson; and
(b) the procedure for the convening of meetings and for the
conduct of business at those meetings shall be as determined by
the Authority.
(15) Half of the members of the Authority shall constitute a
quorum at any meeting of the Authority.
(16) The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson and in the absence of both the Chairperson or the
Vice-Chairperson, a member appointed by the members then
present, and forming a quorum shall preside at a meeting of the
Authority.
(17) A decision supported by a majority of the votes cast at a
meeting of the Authority at which a quorum is present shall be the
decision of the Authority.
(18) The presiding member at a meeting of the Authority shall
cause a record of the proceedings at the meeting to be made.
(19) Records made for the purpose of subsection (17) may be
destroyed after the expiry of the period determined by the Authority.
(20) The first meeting of the Authority shall be called by the
Minister in such manner as the Minister thinks fit.
9.__(1) A member who has a direct or indirect pecuniary
interest__
(a) in a matter which is being considered, or is about to be
considered, at a meeting of the Authority; or
(b) in a thing done or about to be done by the Authority,
shall, as soon as possible after the relevant facts have come to his
knowledge, disclose the nature of the interest at a meeting of the
Authority.
(2)
A
disclosure
at
such
a
meeting
that
the
member
concerned__
No. 2
Water Resources
15
Disclosure
of interest


--- PAGE 16 ---

(a) is a member, or is in the employment, of a specified
company or other body;
(b) is a partner, or is in the employment, of a specified person;
or
(c) has some other specified interest relating to a specified
company or other body or a specified person,
shall be deemed to be a sufficient disclosure of the nature of the
interest in any matter or thing relating to that company or other body
or to that person which may arise after the date of the disclosure.
(3) The Authority shall cause particulars of any disclosure made
under subsection (1) or (2) to be recorded in a book kept for the
purpose and that book shall be open at all reasonable hours to the
inspection, free of charge, by any person.
(4) After a member has, or is deemed to have, disclosed the nature
of an interest in any matter or thing under subsection (1) or (2), the
member shall not, unless it is otherwise determined__
(a) be present during any deliberation, or take part in any
decision, of the Authority with respect to that matter; or
(b) exercise or perform any powers or functions under this Act
with respect to that thing,
as the case may require.
(5) Subsection (4) shall not apply to a member whose interest
consists merely of the fact that the member is the holder of a permit.
(6) A contravention of subsection (4) shall not in itself invalidate
any decision of the Authority or the exercise or performance of any
power or function under this Act.
10.__(1) The Authority shall have the following powers and
functions__
(a) to develop principles, guidelines and procedures for the
allocation of water resources;
(b) to monitor, and from time to time reassess, the National
Water Policy and the National Water Resources Master Plan;
(c) to receive and determine applications for permits for water
use;
(d) to monitor and enforce conditions attached to permits for
water use;
(e) to regulate and protect water resources quality from adverse
impacts;
(f) to manage and protect water catchments;
16
Water Resources
No. 2
Powers and
functions of
the Authority


--- PAGE 17 ---

(g) in accordance with guidelines in the National Water Policy,
to determine charges to be imposed for the use of water from any
water resource;
(h) to gather and maintain information on water resources and
from time to time to publish forecasts, projections and informa-
tion on water resources;
(i) to liaise with the relevant stakeholders for the better
regulation and management of water resources;
(j) to advise the Minister concerning any matter in connection
with water resources;
(k) to assist the Minister in the coordination of hydrological and
hydrogeological investigations;
(l) to coordinate the preparation, implementation and amend-
ment of a water action plan and to recommend the water action
plan to the Minister;
(m) at the request of the Minister, advise any other Minister
who may request advice on__
(i) issues of policy relevant to the investigation, use, control,
protection, management or administration of water; or
(ii) any other issue that may be referred to it;
(n) whether on request or otherwise, to review the law relating
to water and advise the Minister on any amendments that may be
required for the improvement or better administration of that law;
(o) to advise the responsible Minister, as the case may require,
on any dispute between agencies involved in water management
that may be referred to it; and
(p) to undertake any other functions conferred upon it under
this Act or referred to it by the Minister from time to time.
(2) The Authority may, with the consent of the Director of Public
Prosecutions given under the Criminal Procedure and Evidence
Code, undertake the prosecution of any offences arising under this
Act or in connection with the performance of its functions.
(3) The Authority shall have such other powers and functions as
may be conferred or imposed on it by or under this or any other Act,
or as may be reasonably incidental to the exercise or performance of
any power or function so conferred or imposed.
(4) Except as to the contents of any report or recommendation
made by it, the Authority shall, in the exercise and performance of
its powers and functions be subject to such directions as may be
given from time to time by the Minister.
No. 2
Water Resources
17
Cap. 8:01


--- PAGE 18 ---

(5) A summary of any directions given under subsection (4)
during a financial year shall be published in the Authority’s annual
report prepared under section 23 (1).
11.__(1) The Authority may, for the purpose of performing its
functions under this Act, establish committees and delegate to any
such committee such of its functions as it considers necessary.
(2) The Authority may appoint as members of a committee
established under subsection (1) persons who are or are not
members of the Authority and such persons shall hold office for
such period as the Authority may determine.
(3) Subject to any specific or general direction of the Authority, a
committee established under subsection (1) may regulate its own
procedure.
12.__(1) The Authority may in its discretion at any time and for
any period invite any person, and the Minister may in like manner
nominate an officer in the public service, to attend any meeting of
the Authority or of any of its committees and take part in the
deliberations of the meeting, but such person or officer shall not be
entitled to vote at the meeting.
(2) Section 9 shall apply mutatis mutandis to a person or an
officer attending a meeting of the Authority pursuant to subsection
(1).
13.
The Authority may establish such regional offices in or near
any catchment area as the Authority may determine.
14.__(1) There shall be an Executive Director of the Authority
who shall be appointed by the Authority on such terms and
conditions as the Authority may determine.
(2) The Executive Director shall be the chief executive officer of
the Authority and, subject to the directions of the governing board,
shall be responsible for the management of the affairs of the
Authority.
(3) The Authority may appoint such other officers and staff as
may be necessary for the exercise and performance of its powers and
functions, upon such terms and conditions as it may determine.
15.__(1) The Minister may, in writing, delegate to the Authority
any of his powers or functions under this Act other than__
(a) the powers conferred by this section;
(b) the power to make regulations; and
(c) the power to determine appeals.
18
Water Resources
No. 2
Committees
of the
Authority
Invited persons
Regional
offices
Staff of the
Authority
Delegation of
powers and
functions


--- PAGE 19 ---

(2) Delegation under subsection (1) may be in relation to a matter
or class of matters or to any part of Malawi.
(3) The Minister may in writing, revoke a delegation under
subsection (1), and the fact that the Minister has delegated a power
or function shall not prevent him from exercising that power or
function.
(4) Powers and functions delegated under subsection (1) shall be
exercised or performed in accordance with the conditions set out in
the instrument of delegation.
(5) A person to whom a power or function has been delegated
under this section shall have all necessary power to exercise the
powers or functions delegated notwithstanding that the person
would not be legally empowered were it not for this section.
(6) The person exercising the delegated powers or functions under
this section may receive written or oral submission from any person
on any matter within the delegation.
(7) Where in the exercise of a delegated power or performing a
delegated function the opinion or discretion of the Minister is
required, the person may, unless the contrary intention appears,
exercise or perform the power or function upon his own opinion or
discretion as the case may require.
(8) Where there is a conflict between matters to which regard
has to be made with respect to the provisions of this Act and the
instrument of delegation, the person acting on behalf of the Minister
or an authorized person shall apply the provisions of this Act.
16.__(1) The Authority shall provide for__
(a) the collection, collation and analysis of data concerning the
occurrence, flow, characteristics, quality and use of any water or
waste;
(b) the systematic gauging and recording of rainfall and of the
volume, flow and quality of other water or waste;
(c) the construction, operation and removal of gauging, record-
ing and monitoring stations and investigation and monitoring
boreholes; or
(d) the sampling and analysis of any water or waste.
(2) The Authority may do anything necessary or expedient for or
in connection with the exercise of the powers conferred by
subsection (1).
17.__(1) The Authority may require any class or type of persons,
or the person on whom notice is served, as the case may be, to__
(a) keep and maintain records;
No. 2
Water Resources
19
Water
resources
investigation
Authority’s
powers to
require
records, etc.


--- PAGE 20 ---

(b) install, operate and maintain equipment;
(c) take samples, dispose of them in a particular manner or
submit them to such analysis by such person or class of persons;
or
(d) provide information to a person,
concerning the investigation, use, control, protection, management
or administration of any water or concerning any waste, as may be
prescribed in a regulation or notice.
(2) Anything required to be done by a regulation made or a notice
given under subsection (1) shall be done at the expense of the
person to whom the notice or regulation applies, unless the
Authority otherwise determines.
(3) A person who contravenes or fails to comply with or causes or
allows any person to contravene or fail to comply with this section,
commits an offence.
(4) Any person who furnishes any information under this section
or who causes or allows any statement or representation to be made
which he knows to be false or misleading in a material particular
commits an offence.
18.__(1) The Authority shall provide for a national monitoring
and information system on water resources.
(2) The system shall provide for__
(a) the collection and management of data and information
regarding water resources and their management; and
(b) procedures for gathering data and the analysis and
dissemination of information on water resources.
(3) For the purposes of the system established under this section,
the Authority may, by order require any person, within a reasonable
time or on a regular basis, to provide it with specified information,
documents, samples or materials.
(4) Regulations made under this Act may specify requirements for
the keeping of records and the furnishing of information to the
Authority.
(5) On payment of the prescribed fee, any member of the public__
(a) shall have access to information contained in any national
information system; and
(b) shall be supplied with a copy of the Authority’s annual
report.
19.__(1) The funds of the Authority shall consist of__
(a) such sums as may be appropriated by Parliament for the
purposes of the Authority;
20
Water Resources
No. 2
National
monitoring
of, and
information on,
water resources
management
Sources
of funds


--- PAGE 21 ---

(b) any fees, charges, etc., payable under this Act;
(c) such other moneys and assets as may vest in or accrue to the
Authority in the course of its functions; and
(d) such moneys or other assets as may accrue to, or vest in the
Authority by way of grants, subsidies, bequests, donations, gifts,
subscriptions, rents, interest or royalties from any person.
(2) The Authority shall keep proper books of accounts and other
records relating thereto in respect of its funds and shall in every
respect
comply
with
the
provisions
of
the
Public
Finance
Management Act.
(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be examined and audited
annually by auditors appointed by the Authority and approved by the
Minister.
20.__(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Public
Finance Management Act, the Authority shall retain in a fund
managed by it all of the revenue from water use charges payable
under a permit, to be applied by the Authority in meeting costs
incurred in the performance of its functions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), funds
retained by the Authority under that subsection may be applied for
the payment of compensation payable by the Authority under this
Act, whether or not the payment is subsequently recoverable from a
permit holder or other person.
21.__(1) The Authority may invest any sums which are not
immediately required for its objects.
(2) Subject to the provisions of the Public Finance Management
Act, the Authority may borrow either temporarily by way of
overdraft or otherwise, such sums as it may require for meeting its
obligations or discharging its functions under this Act.
22.
The financial year of the Authority shall be the period
commencing on the date of commencement of this Act and ending
on the following 30th June and thereafter it shall be a period of
twelve months ending on 30th June every year.
23.__(1) As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after
the expiry of each financial year, the Authority shall submit to the
Minister a report concerning its activities during that financial year.
(2) The report referred to in subsection (1) shall be in such form
as the Minister shall approve and shall include information on the
financial affairs of the Authority, and there shall be appended to the
report__
(a) an audited balance sheet;
No. 2
Water Resources
21
Cap.37:02
Application of
revenue from
permit charges
and licence
fees
Cap. 37:02
Investment
powers of
the Authority
Cap. 37:02
Financial year
of the
Authority
Annual reports


--- PAGE 22 ---

(b) an audited statement of income and expenditure; and
(c) such other information as the Authority may consider
appropriate or as the Minister may direct;
(3) The Minister shall, during the meeting of the National
Assembly next following receipt by him of the report referred to in
subsection (1), lay the report before the National Assembly and
subsequently the report shall be published.
24.
The Authority shall, at the end of each financial year,
produce a progress report on its activities during that period and
shall publish the report.
PART III__CATCHMENT MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
25.__(1) In accordance with the National Water Policy, the
Authority may, by notice published in the Gazette, designate a
defined area from which rainwater flows or drains into a water-
course, to be a catchment area for the purposes of this Act.
(2) A catchment area designated under this section may include
two or more sub-catchment areas.
26.__(1) A catchment management committee may be established
for a specific catchment area, after public consultation, on the
proposal of the community and stakeholders concerned, or the
Authority may establish a catchment management committee on its
own initiative.
(2) A proposal to establish a catchment management committee
shall at least contain__
(a) a proposed name and description of the proposed catchment
management committee;
(b) a description of the major water resources in the proposed
catchment area, including information about the current status of
protection, use, development, conservation, management and
control of those resources;
(c) the proposed functions of the catchment management
committee;
(d) the proposed funding of the catchment management
committee;
(e) the feasibility of the proposed catchment management
committee in terms of locally available technical, financial and
administrative capacity; and
(f) an indication of the consultation made in developing the
proposal, and the result of the consultation.
22
Water Resources
No. 2
Progress
reports
Catchment
areas
Establishment
of catchment
management
committees


--- PAGE 23 ---

(3) The Authority may call for information additional to that
required under subsection (2) and may conduct an investigation
regarding the establishment of a proposed catchment management
committee.
27.
The Authority may, in consultation with the Minister and
after receiving a proposal containing the information required in
terms of section 26 (1) and any additional information called for
or acquired on investigation under section 26 (3) or on its own
initiative by notice in the Gazette__
(a) establish a catchment management committee, give it a
name and determine its area; or
(b) change or amend the name or area of an existing catchment
management committee.
28.__(1) The members of a catchment management committee
shall be chosen from among__
(a) representatives of ministries, departments or other public
bodies responsible for matters relating to water resources in the
catchment area;
(b) representatives of any regional development authorities and
local authorities whose areas of jurisdiction or any part thereof
fall within the catchment area concerned;
(c) representatives of farmers within the catchment area
concerned;
(d) representatives of the business community operating
within the catchment area concerned;
(e) representatives of the non-governmental organizations
engaged in water resources management programmes within the
catchment area concerned; and
(f) other persons who have demonstrated competence in
matters relating to the management of water resources.
29.__(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 25, a
catchment management committee shall, in relation to the catch-
ment area for which it is appointed, advise officers of the Authority
at the appropriate regional office concerning__
(a) water resources conservation, use and allocation;
(b) the grant, adjustment, cancellation or variation of any
licence and permit under this Act; and
(c) any other matters pertinent to the proper management of
water resources.
No. 2
Water Resources
23
Procedure for
establish-
ment of
catchment
management
committees
Composition
of a catchment
management
committee
Functions of
catchment
management
committees


--- PAGE 24 ---

(2) Subject to the relevant Catchment Management Strategy, a
catchment management committee may also undertake, on its own
initiative and with funding received pursuant to section 31, water
resources conservation activities and works.
30.__(1)
The
first
meeting
of
a
catchment
management
committee shall be called by the Authority in such manner as the
Authority thinks fit.
(2) The Authority shall facilitate the activities of the catchment
management committees by making available secretariat services
and logistical and administrative support.
31.__(1) Catchment management committees wishing to engage
in water resources conservation activities and works pursuant to
section 29 (2)__
(a) shall obtain from the Authority, on request, a percentage
from the proceeds of the collection of water charges, in
accordance with section 120; and
(b) may obtain money from any other lawful source, including
the Water Resources Trust Fund established under section 121, for
the purpose of carrying out their functions.
(2) Catchment management committees engaging in water
resources conservation activities and works and, which for these
purposes receive and manage funds, shall submit to the Authority
or to the provider of other funding, where applicable, an annual
audited statement of their accounts.
32.__(1) The Authority shall, at its own initiative or at the
initiative of the relevant catchment management committee,
formulate a catchment management strategy for the management,
use, development, conservation, protection and control of water
resources within each catchment area, in consultation with the
relevant catchment management committee and following public
consultation.
(2) In the process of formulating a catchment management
strategy the Authority shall consult with the departments in charge
of, respectively, forestry and the environment, and it shall take into
account, but shall not be bound by, any relevant prior determination
made by either department pursuant to the legislation in force.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Authority to review the catchment
management strategy from time to time.
(4) A catchment management strategy shall__
(a) be consistent with the National Water Resources Master
Plan;
24
Water Resources
No. 2
Authority
to assist
catchment
management
committees
Funding and
auditing of
operational
activities of
catchment
management
committees
Catchment
Management
Strategy


--- PAGE 25 ---

(b) prescribe the principles, objectives, procedures for the
management, use, development, conservation and control of
water resources within each catchment area;
(c) contain water allocation plans which set out principles for
allocating water; and
(d) provide mechanisms and facilities for enabling the public
and communities to participate in managing the water resources
within each catchment area.
(5) The catchment management strategy, in force for the time
being, shall be published in the Gazette.
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (4) (d), the
catchment management strategy shall encourage and facilitate the
establishment and operation of associations of water users and for
conflict resolution and cooperative management of water resources
in catchment areas.
(7) The Minister, the Authority and any public authority shall,
when exercising any statutory power or performing any statutory
function, take into account and give effect to any catchment
management strategy in force under this section.
33.
The catchment management committees shall, with the
technical assistance of the Authority, and with funding obtained in
accordance with section 31, be under a duty to promote and
sensitize all users of watercourses and water bodies within the
applicable water management area on the protection and manage-
ment of the watercourses and water bodies and the conservation and
equitable, efficient and sustainable utilization of such watercourses
and water bodies in conformity with national legislation and with
regional and international water and environmental conventions.
PART IV__NATIONAL WATER POLICY AND NATIONAL WATER
RESOURCES MASTER PLAN
34.__(1) The Minister shall publish in the Gazette, the National
Water Policy in accordance with which the water resources of
Malawi shall be managed, protected, used, developed, conserved
and controlled.
(2) The Minister shall periodically review the National Water
Policy and may, from time to time, publish in the Gazette the revised
policy.
(3) The National Water Policy shall prescribe the principles,
objectives, procedures and institutional arrangements for the
management, protection, use, development, conservation and
control of water resources.
No. 2
Water Resources
25
Sensitization
of users of
water on
protection
and
management
of
watercourses
and water
bodies
National
Water Policy


--- PAGE 26 ---

(4) The Minister, the Authority and all public bodies shall, when
exercising any statutory power or performing any statutory function,
take into account and give effect to the National Water Policy.
35.__(1) The Minister may, on the basis of data progressively
generated
under
water
resources
investigations,
require
the
Authority to__
(a) prepare, review and keep up-to-date, a comprehensive plan
for the investigation, use, control, protection, conservation,
management and administration of water resources for the nation;
and
(b) recommend any revision of it.
(2) The National Water Resources Master Plan shall, among other
things, address matters relating to__
(a) a water balance for each catchment area that compares
forecasted water demand with data and information regarding
water availability;
(b) proposed options for meeting forecasted demand for each
catchment area in which forecasted water demands exceeds
available supply, which options may include__
(i) water demand management programmes;
(ii) necessary infrastructure construction;
(iii) any other measure, including appropriate legal reforms
considered necessary in achieving the objectives of the
National Water Resources Master Plan;
(c) the protection of water resources from over-exploitation and
from pollution; and
(d) the conservation of water resources, including through the
recycling and re-use of wastewater, the harvesting of rainwater,
and any other suitable conservation practice and technique.
(3) The Minister shall submit the National Water Resources
Master Plan recommended to him under subsection (1) to the
Cabinet with his recommendations within twenty-one days of
receiving it.
(4) The detailed components of the National Water Resources
Master Plan and procedures for its preparation, revision and
recommendations to and consideration by the Minister may be as
prescribed by the Minister, and if the Minister does not prescribe,
as may be determined by the Authority.
36.
After approval by the Cabinet, the Minister shall by notice
published in the Gazette, issue the National Water Resources Master
Plan which shall be binding to all persons and public authorities.
26
Water Resources
No. 2
National
Water
Resources
Master Plan
Plan to be
adhered to


--- PAGE 27 ---

PART V__WATER ABSTRACTION AND USE
37.__(1) The Minister, in consultation with the district councils
concerned may, by notice published in the Gazette, reserve part or
all of the flow of a watercourse, including any ground water
resource and the water stored in a public reservoir to__
(a) meet the domestic use of the water users concerned; or
(b) reasonably protect aquatic and wetland ecosystems,
including their biological diversity, and to maintain essential
ecosystem functions.
(2) Any water resource reserved under subsection (1) shall be
taken into account in__
(a) the licensing of water abstractions under section 39; and
(b) the issuing of a permit for effluent discharge under section
92.
(3) The Minister may allow the use of a reserved water resource
if such use is compatible with the purposes of the reserve.
(4) The Minister, the Authority and all public bodies shall, when
exercising any power or performing any function in relation to the
water resource concerned, take into account and give effect to the
requirements of the reserved water resource.
38.__(1) Subject to subsection (4), a person having lawful access
thereto may abstract water from a water resource for domestic use
without obtaining a licence from the Authority under this Part.
(2) A person having lawful access thereto may abstract and use
water for domestic use, subject only to public health and environ-
mental limitations, and any other limitations that may be imposed
from time to time by the Authority for purposes of efficient water
management practices or in prescribed emergency circumstances.
(3) A person having lawful access thereto may abstract and use
groundwater__
(a) where none of the necessary works are situated__
(i) within one hundred metres of any body of surface water,
other than inclosed spring water, or
(ii) within a groundwater conservation area;
(c) by means of hand-dug boreholes; or
(d) by means of a borehole not deeper than ten metres.
(4) Subsection (1) shall not apply to a person who abstracts water
in bulk from a water resource and supplies it to others for domestic
use.
No. 2
Water Resources
27
Reservation of
water resource
Abstraction of
water for
domestic use,
use of
groundwater,
and rainwater
harvesting


--- PAGE 28 ---

(5) A person has the right to harvest rainwater on his own land or
on communal land and to use it for domestic purposes.
39.__(1) No person shall abstract and use water unless authorized
to do so under this Part.
(2) A licence under this Part shall be required for any of the
following purposes__
(a) the abstraction, impoundment and use of water from a water
resource; and
(b) the drainage of any swamp or other land.
(3) A person who__
(a) not being the holder of a licence under this Part, constructs
or employs any works for the abstraction or impoundment of
water; or
(b) being the holder of a licence under this Part, constructs or
employs any such works in contravention of the conditions of the
licence,
commits an offence.
(4) A holder of a licence authorizing the construction of works
who, without the permission of the Authority, takes water from any
water resource by means of any work authorized by the licence
before the whole of the works authorized by the licence have been
inspected and cleared commits an offence.
40.__(1) A person wishing to abstract and use water shall apply to
the Authority in the prescribed form for a licence and the application
shall contain the following information__
(a) the name of the applicant;
(b) the water resource from which the proposed abstraction will
be made;
(c) the proposed location of the abstraction;
(d) the type and location of the proposed beneficial use;
(e) the names of owner or occupier of the land upon which the
proposed beneficial use will be made;
(f) the proposed rate and volume of the abstraction;
(g) the proposed timing of the abstraction;
(h) a description of any waterworks necessary to accomplish
the proposed abstraction and put the abstracted water to beneficial
use and a proposed schedule for the completion of such
waterworks;
(i) description of the proposed treatment, if any, that will be
given to the abstracted water, including any chemicals proposed
to be applied to the water;
28
Water Resources
No. 2
Abstraction
and use of
water subject
to licence
Application
for licence


--- PAGE 29 ---

(j) a description of the volume, rate and chemical composition
of any effluent or return flow resulting from application of the
abstracted water to beneficial use and a description of the location
that any such effluent or return flow is expected to enter a water
resource; and
(k) any additional information the Minister may prescribe.
(2) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application under
subsection (1), give public notice of the application in the prescribed
manner.
(3) Any interested person may notify the Authority within such
period as may be prescribed that he objects to the grant of a water
right and specify the grounds of such objection, upon receipt of such
objection the Authority shall invite the person objecting to a hearing.
(4) The Authority shall consider every application and any
objections made to it in respect thereof and after consulting such
persons and authorities as it may deem necessary, submit the
application together with its recommendations to the Minister.
(5) The application for a licence to abstract and use water shall be
accompanied by__
(a) the prescribed charge; and
(b) where applicable, an environmental impact analysis of the
proposed abstraction of water upon the environment and existing
water users and water resources.
(6) The Authority may, after taking into consideration any
objection that may be raised and after consultation with any person
or public authority as it may see fit, grant a licence to the applicant.
(7) A grant of a licence under this Part shall not imply representa-
tion or guarantee by the Authority, authorized person or public
authority that water is or will be available in the place and at the
times indicated in the licence.
41.__(1) The Authority shall take the following matters into
consideration in determining whether or not to issue a licence__
(a) whether or not the proposed abstraction and use of water are
consistent with__
(i) the objectives referred to in section 4 and the National
Water Policy;
(ii) the National Water Resources Master Plan; and
(iii) any reservation of water made under section 37;
(b) the impact of the proposed abstraction upon existing water
users, water resources and the water reserved or allocated
for environmental uses;
No. 2
Water Resources
29
Criteria for
issuing a
licence


--- PAGE 30 ---

(c) the safe yield of the aquifer from which the abstraction is
proposed, if the application is for abstraction of ground water;
(d) the conformity of the proposed use with the efficient water
management practices;
(e) the likely effect of the proposed abstraction__
(i) on the quality of any water resource, and on aquatic
ecosystems dependent on the resource;
(ii) on Malawi’s obligations relating to shared waters;
(f) the need to ensure the efficient and beneficial use of water
resources;
(g) any catchment management strategy applicable to the
relevant water resource;
(h) the likely effect of the proposed water use on the water
resource and on other water users;
(i) the existence of any traditional community and the extent of
customary rights and practices in, or dependent upon, the water
resource to which an application for the licence relates;
(j) the investments already made and to be made by the water
user in respect of the water use in question;
(k) the strategic importance of the proposed water use;
(l) the probable duration of the activity or undertaking for
which a water use is to be authorized; and
(m) any additional criteria the Minister may prescribe.
(2) The Minister may issue more than one licence to abstract and
use water from one water resource, subject to such terms and
conditions that will enable concurrent use of the same resource by
the applicants.
(3) A licence shall, subject to this Act, remain in force for the
period specified in it, and may be renewed from time to time on
application by the licensee, which shall be filed no less than six
months before the due expiration date of the licence.
42.__(1) A licence to abstract and use water shall specify__
(a) the duration of the licence, which shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of section 55;
(b) the location of the abstraction and location of the use;
(c) the water use or uses for which it is granted;
(d) the name and other details of the person to whom it is
granted;
(e) the conditions under which it is granted;
(f) the frequency of review of the licence;
30
Water Resources
No. 2
Contents of
the licence


--- PAGE 31 ---

(g) whether the licence is subject to periodic review, suspen-
sion, amendment or cancellation in accordance with this Act;
(h) any fees and charges payable as prescribed in section 119;
and
(i) any other matter as may be prescribed.
43.
A licence to abstract and use water shall be issued subject
to__
(a) the achievement of the goals and objectives of the National
Water Resources Master Plan;
(b) the protection of the environment and water resource from
which the abstraction is made, the stream flow regime, and other
existing and potential use of the water resource, including uses by
virtue of customary rights and practices, by__
(i) setting out the specific volume of water or percentage of
flow which may be abstracted;
(ii) setting out the rate of abstraction;
(iii) specifying the place where water may be abstracted;
(iv) specifying the times when water may be abstracted and
used, or not used;
(v) limiting the volume of water which may be impounded
and stored;
(vi) specifying locations where a watercourse may be
impounded and where water would be stored;
(vii) requiring the licensee to become a member of a local
association of water users, where appropriate, before water
may be abstracted; and
(viii) adding any such terms regarding protection of the
water resource, and stream flow regime or existing or potential
uses of water resource which the Minister determines to be
appropriate;
(c) proper water management, by__
(i)
specifying
efficient
water
resources
management
practices and general requirements for any water use, including
water conservation measures;
(ii) requiring monitoring, analysis and reporting by the
licensee on every water use dependent upon the licence,
including bulk uses or local authority uses, by specifying the
aspects of water use to be monitored and reported, and the
devices to be used for such monitoring;
(iii) requiring the preparation and approval of a water
resources management plan;
No. 2
Water Resources
31
Terms and
conditions of
licence


--- PAGE 32 ---

(iv) requiring the licensee to make water available to any
person specified in the licence; and
(v) adding any such terms regarding proper water resources
management which the Authority determines to be appropriate;
(d) the proper discharge or disposal of any return flow or
effluent, by__
(i) specifying the water resource to which and the manner in
which return flow or effluent shall be returned or disposed of;
(ii) specifying permissible levels for some or all of the
chemical or physical components of the return flow or effluent;
(iii) specifying the treatment to which the return flow or
effluent shall be subject, before its return or disposal;
(iv) specifying the volume and rate of discharge of return
flow or effluent which may be returned or disposed of;
(v) adding such terms regarding discharge or disposal of
excess flow or effluent which the Authority determines to be
appropriate; and
(e) the accommodation of any reasonable requirements of a
community.
44.__(1) Where the Authority proposes to grant, or to amend the
terms of, a licence under this Part, it shall refer the proposal,
together with a copy or summary of the application and appropriate
plans, specifications and other information to any relevant public
authority.
(2) A public authority to which a proposal is referred under
subsection (1) shall inform the Authority in writing within thirty
days after the day on which the proposal was referred to it__
(a) whether the proposal is supported or whether there are
objections to it;
(b) whether, and if so, what special terms should be included in
the proposed licence or amendment.
(3) The Authority shall__
(a) take into account any report and comments received under
subsection (2);
(b) refuse to grant the proposed licence or make the proposed
amendment if a competent public authority submits a written
report objecting to the proposal on the grounds that public health
is likely to be endangered by the proposed licence or amendment;
and
32
Water Resources
No. 2
Reference of
licences to
other
authorities


--- PAGE 33 ---

(c) refuse to grant the proposed licence or make the proposed
amendment if an Environmental Impact Assessment carried out
pursuant to the provisions of the Environment Management Act
and the Environment Impact Assessment Guidelines determines
that the environmental is likely to be endangered by the proposed
licence or amendment.
45.
Subject to guidelines established by the Minister from time
to time, the Authority may exempt__
(a) a public authority; or
(b) a class of persons or works,
from all or any of the provisions of section 39 on such conditions as
it may deem fit.
46.__(1) The Authority may, if in its opinion exceptional circum-
stances warrant such action, grant a temporary licence authorizing,
unconditionally or subject to conditions, the use of water from a
water resource and construction of the works required therefor,
without subjecting the application to public consultation.
(2) In considering whether or not to grant a licence in accordance
with this section, the Authority shall have regard to the extent to
which the grant of such a licence would be likely to interfere with
the domestic requirements of other users.
(3) A licence granted in accordance with this section shall not be
granted or renewed so as to be in force for a period exceeding, or for
periods which in the aggregate exceed, one year.
47.
Where under section 40 (1) (h) a licence includes an
authorization to construct necessary works, the licensee shall not
commence operations under the licence unless and until the relevant
works have been inspected and cleared by the Authority.
48.
A licensee shall inform the Authority of any change in the
location of use of the water allowed to be abstracted under a licence,
including in particular upon the subdivision of the land on which the
water is used, or for the benefit of which the water is used.
49.__(1) Whenever it is shown to the satisfaction of the Authority
that, owing to increased demand or other cause, the use of water
under a licence, or the method or point of diversion or other manner
in which the water is so used causes__
(a) a deterioration in the quality of water;
(b) a shortage of water for domestic purposes; or
(c) a shortage of water for any other purpose which in the
opinion of the Authority should have priority,
No. 2
Water Resources
33
Cap. 60:02
Exemption of
works
Issue of
temporary
licence
Licence
conditional on
inspection
of works
Licensee to
inform
Authority of
change of
location of
water use
Variation
of a licence
owing to
change in
circumstances,
etc.


--- PAGE 34 ---

it may vary the licence so as to alter the discharge or quantity of
water or any other aspect of water use authorized by the licence, or
alter the method or point of diversion or other specifications, terms
or conditions of the licence.
(2) No licence shall be varied under this section unless notice of
the proposed variation has been served on the licensee and the
licensee has been given a reasonable opportunity to show cause to
the Authority why the licence should not be cancelled or varied.
50.__(1) The Authority may cancel a licence where the licensee
has__
(a) failed to comply with any express or implied condition to
which the licence is subject;
(b) taken or used more water than he is entitled to take in any
period;
(c) taken or used water for a purpose other than that for which
he is entitled;
(d) failed to comply with any provision of this Act; or
(e) not made full beneficial use of the licence within the two
preceding years.
(2) No licence shall be cancelled under this section unless notice
of the proposed cancellation has been served on the licensee and the
licensee has been given a reasonable opportunity to show cause to
the Authority as to why the licence should not be cancelled.
(3) No compensation shall be payable to any licensee whose
licence has been cancelled pursuant to this section.
51.__(1) Subject to section 52, where the Authority is of the opin-
ion that in order to make water available for a public purpose it is
necessary to cancel or vary a licence, the Authority may cancel or
vary the licence.
(2) The Minister may, by notice published in the Gazette, declare
any purpose to be a public purpose for the purpose of this section.
(3) The Authority shall pay compensation to any licensee whose
licence has been cancelled pursuant to this section.
52.
Where it is established that, for any reason beyond the
reasonable control of the Authority, the natural flow in a water-
course available to all users has dropped or is likely to drop so that
more water is permitted to be diverted, stored, or used than is
available in the watercourse, the Authority shall hold a public
hearing into the matter and thereafter may amend any or all licences
to divert, store, or use water from that watercourse in an equitable
and fair manner as the Authority may deem appropriate.
34
Water Resources
No. 2
Cancellation
of a licence
Cancellation or
variation of a
licence for a
public purpose
Variation
of licence
following
change in
flows


--- PAGE 35 ---

53.__(1) On the application by a licensee, the Authority may vary
the licence or any condition attached to a licence in accordance with
the application of the licensee or on such conditions as the Authority
may deem necessary having regard to the circumstances.
(2) The Authority may vary the licence so as__
(a) to vary the point of diversion or abstraction of the water
used under the licence;
(b) to vary the use of water authorized by the licence; or
(c) to permit the mixture of waters authorized to be taken or
used with those authorized to be taken or used by another licence,
whether held by the same or another licensee;
(d) to remedy any defect whereby the licence is incomplete or
indefinite in its terms and conditions; or
(e) to vary any other term or condition of the licence,
if the Authority is satisfied that the variation is not contrary to the
public interest or the rights of others.
(3) A variation relating to__
(a) the use of water authorized by the licence; or
(b) a term or condition of a prescribed kind,
shall not be made without public consultation.
54.
If a licence to abstract and use water expires and is not
renewed, or is cancelled the Minister may__
(a) require the licensee, at the licensee’s expense, to remove
any liens or other restrictions preventing the free use of the
abstraction works;
(b) order the licensee to restore, at the licensee’s expense, the
state of affairs which existed before a licence was issued, if doing
so is reasonable and practicable under the circumstances; and
(c) enter into an arrangement with the licensee or any other
person for maintenance of the impoundment, abstraction or
effluent discharge works.
55.__(1) A licensee may lease his licence to another person for a
period not exceeding six months, after giving thirty days’ notice to
the Authority.
(2) A licensee may only lease his licence to another person for a
period longer than the period referred to in subsection (1) if such
lease is approved by the Authority.
(3) An application for approval of the leasing of a licence under
subsection (2) shall be submitted to the Authority for consideration
in accordance with subsection (4).
No. 2
Water Resources
35
Variation of a
licence at
request of
licensee
Effects of
expiry or
cancellation
of a licence to
abstract and
use water
Lease of
licence to
abstract and
use water


--- PAGE 36 ---

(4) Upon receipt of an application for approval of the leasing of a
licence, the Authority shall consider__
(a) whether the terms and conditions of the proposed lease is
consistent with the terms and conditions of the licence; and
(b) any deviation from the terms and conditions of the licence
that may impact adversely upon other persons and the environ-
ment.
(5) The Authority may, within ninety days from receipt of the
application for approval of the leasing of a licence, grant the
application with or without conditions or refuse the application.
56.
A licence may be passed on to a named licensee as a
successor-in-title at death or transfer, but such passage shall not
extend the duration of the licence.
57.__(1) A licensee who ceases to utilize water in accordance
with the terms of his licence shall, by notice to the Authority,
abandon the whole of the licence or any part capable of separation.
(2) Upon such abandonment, the Authority may direct the
licensee to remove, within such time as it may specify, all or any
works erected in connection with the licence.
(3) A licensee who neglects or fails to remove the works
concerned commits an offence, and the Authority may remove all or
any portion of the works, and recover the cost of their removal from
the licensee as a civil debt in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring or
authorizing a licensee wholly or in part to abandon a licence
contrary to the conditions of any mortgage or charge upon the land
to which the licence is appurtenant.
58.__(1) Where__
(a) a licence is to be cancelled or varied by the Authority in
pursuance of this Act;
(b) a licence has been granted on the basis of false or
misleading information supplied by the licensee; or
(c) a licence has been granted in contravention of the
provisions of this Act or any regulations made under this Act with
respect to the terms and conditions of such a licence,
the Authority may, by notice served on the licensee, require the
licensee, if he has not already done so, to surrender the licence to the
Authority:
Provided however that, if subsection (1) (c) a defect has been
detected, the Authority shall cure such defect if it is in its power to
do so, whereupon this section shall not apply.
36
Water Resources
No. 2
Succession to
a licence to
abstract and
use water
Abandonment
of permitted
or licensed
activities
Surrender of
licence


--- PAGE 37 ---

(2) A licensee who fails to comply with such a notice commits an
offence.
59.__(1) The Authority shall establish and maintain a register of
all licences issued and in force including details of the licences and
their terms and conditions and the results of monitoring and enforce-
ment action taken by the Authority regarding each licence.
(2) Information contained in the register shall be accessible by the
public on payment of the prescribed fee.
60.__(1) Where the same person needs a licence to abstract and
use water and a permit to discharge effluent, the Authority shall
grant to the person a combined licence to abstract and use water and
to discharge effluent.
(2) A person to whom a combined licence has been issued shall
not require a separate effluent discharge permit under section 92.
61.
A licence to abstract and use water shall be granted for a
duration of at least five years.
62.__(1) A licence to abstract and use water issued under this Part
may be renewed at least three months prior to its expiry, if the
licensee submits an application for renewal to the Authority in the
prescribed manner.
(2) When considering an application for renewal made under
subsection (1) the Authority shall consider the application taking
into account__
(a) the provisions of section 41; and
(b) the provisions of section 43.
63.
A person who has saved water whether from harvesting the
same or otherwise may transfer to another person the water so
saved, in return for a price or free of charge:
Provided that in times of water scarcity it shall be obligatory for
any person to transfer saved water to the persons who need the
water, as directed by the Authority under section 65.
64.__(1) A licensee who authorizes the construction of works for
a portion thereof that would, when constructed, be situated upon
lands not held by the licensee shall acquire an easement on, over or
through the land on which the works would be situated and, unless
the works have previously been lawfully constructed, shall not
construct or use the works unless and until he has acquired such an
easement by an agreement.
No. 2
Water Resources
37
Register of
licences
Combined
licence to
abstract and
use water and
to discharge
effluent
Duration of
a licence to
abstract and
use water
Renewal of a
licence to
abstract and
use water
Right to
transfer saved
water
Easements
for works


--- PAGE 38 ---

(2) A licensee who wishes to bring water to, or drain water from
his land over land owned or occupied by another person, may apply
to the Authority for the creation of an easement over that land if he
has been unable to obtain an easement by agreement with the owner
or occupier of that land.
(3) A licensee who wishes to drain waste from his land over land
owned or occupied by another person may apply to the Authority for
the creation of an easement over that land if he has been unable to
obtain an easement by agreement with the owner or occupier of that
land.
(4) On receiving the application under subsection (2) or (3), the
Authority shall, in the prescribed manner, give notice to the owner,
occupier or any other person having an interest in that land.
(5) A person who has any objection to an application made under
subsection (2) or (3) may give notice of objection to the Authority
in a manner and within the period that may be prescribed.
(6) Subject to section 152 and after giving a hearing to all persons
who have an interest in the land, including the applicant, who wish
to be heard, the Authority may create an easement over the land in
the prescribed form as may be appropriate.
(7) An easement under subsection (6) may make provision for__
(a) the construction of works necessary to carry water or waste
across that land;
(b) construction of fences, bridges, crossings or other works in
that land;
(c) the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the owner,
occupier or other person having interest in that land,
and the person having the easement shall comply with the
provisions.
(8) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority under
subsection (6) may appeal to the Water Tribunal against the
decision, if the decision was made without his consent.
(9) If a person who has an easement fails to comply with
subsection (6), the Authority may cancel the easement and notify
the person and the Commissioner for Lands.
(10) If the person who has an easement fails to maintain any
works he constructed under this section, the owner or occupier of
the land on which the works are situated may maintain or repair the
works and recover the reasonable costs as a civil debt from the
person who has the easement.
(11) Any compensation due under this section which remains
unpaid for an unreasonable period may be recovered as a civil debt.
38
Water Resources
No. 2


--- PAGE 39 ---

(12) An easement created under this section shall terminate after
six months after the date of creation, unless it is registered with the
Commissioner for Lands.
65.__(1) For the purposes of this Act, a drought shall be deemed
to exist in any area when the Minister, upon such information as
seems to him sufficient, by order published in the Gazette, declares
that a drought exists in that area.
(2) If the Minister, on the advice of the Authority, is satisfied that,
by reason of an exceptional shortage of rain or by reason of accident
or other unforeseen circumstances, a serious deficiency of water for
essential domestic purposes exists or is threatened in any area, he
may, by order__
(a) declare that an emergency exists; and
(b) direct a person who has a supply of water in excess of his
needs for domestic purposes to supply to the area concerned, or to
a specified person in the area, such quantity of water, and for such
period, as the order may specify.
(3) Any person so directed by an order under this section who
fails to comply with the provisions of the order concerned commits
an offence.
(4) An order under this section may require or authorize__
(a) the laying of pipes and the construction of works on any
land;
(b) the entry on to any land by servants or agents of the
Authority; and
(c) such other measures as the Minister may consider necessary
for the giving and taking of any such water.
(5) If a person to whom an order under this section is directed
fails to comply with the order, the Minister, or any person deputed
by him for the purpose__
(a) may take possession of the water supply and operate any
works of the person concerned for the drawing, diversion or use
of water; and
(b) shall have and may exercise the person’s rights in connec-
tion with them during the period of the order, subject to any
conditions imposed by the order.
(6) It shall be the duty of any person exercising any powers under
this section to do so with reasonable care and in such a manner as to
cause as little damage as possible in so doing, and subject to
compensation for any damage done.
No. 2
Water Resources
39
Emergency
powers in case
of shortage
of water


--- PAGE 40 ---

(7) The compensation made under subsection (5), or such
proportion of it as the Minister may determine, may be recovered by
the Minister, as a debt due to the Government, from a person
benefiting by the supply of water under the order.
(8) A person who, without lawful authority, hinders or obstructs
any person acting in pursuance of an order under this section, or
interferes with any works constructed or under construction in
pursuance of such an order shall be guilty of an offence.
PART VI__CONTROL AND PROTECTION OF GROUNDWATER
66.__(1) Where the Authority is satisfied that, in any area, special
measures for the conservation of groundwater are necessary in the
public interest__
(a) for the protection of public water supplies; or
(b) for the protection of water supplies used for industry,
agriculture or other private purposes,
it may, following public consultation, by order published in the
Gazette declare the area to be a groundwater conservation area.
(2) The Authority may impose such requirements, regulate or
prohibit such conduct or activities, in or in relation to a ground-
water conservation area as the Authority may think necessary to
impose, regulate or prohibit for the protection of the area and its
groundwater.
67.__(1) The issuing of a permit under this Part shall not be
construed as a guarantee, express or implied of a supply of ground-
water.
68.__(1) No person shall drill, construct, enlarge or otherwise
alter a borehole, or engage in borehole drilling programme, for the
purpose of exploring for groundwater, except in accordance with the
provisions of a permit issued under subsection (4).
(2) Any person who wishes to drill, construct, enlarge or alter a
borehole, or engage in a borehole drilling programme for exploring
for groundwater, shall apply to the Authority for a permit to drill a
borehole or to engage in borehole drilling programme in the
prescribed manner.
(3) An application for a permit to construct or drill a borehole
shall be made in the manner and it shall be subject to such terms and
conditions as the Authority thinks fit, including a term of duration
which shall not exceed one year:
Provided that, where the borehole is intended to be constructed or
drilled inside the area of operation of a Water Board__
40
Water Resources
No. 2
Groundwater
conservation
areas
Issuing of
licence not
guarantee to
supply of
water
Permit to drill
a borehole or
to engage in
borehole
drilling
programme for
groundwater
exploration


--- PAGE 41 ---

(a) a notice of intent under subsection (1) shall also be filed
with such Board; and
(b) such Board may advise the Authority as to why, in the
Board’s opinion, an application should not be granted, but the
Authority shall not be bound by the advice of the Board.
(4) Upon receipt of the application for a permit under subsection
(2), the Authority shall, among other things, consider__
(a) the safe yield of the aquifer from which the abstraction of
water is proposed to be made; and
(b) the conformity of the proposed use with efficient water
management practices.
(5) After considering the application in accordance with
subsection (3), the Authority may issue a permit to drill a borehole
or to engage in a borehole drilling programme subject to the
prescribed terms and conditions, and such other conditions as the
Minister may prescribe.
(6) The provisions of Part V shall apply, with the necessary
changes, to a permit to drill a borehole or to engage in borehole
drilling programme issued under this section in relation to the
renewal, transfer, succession, suspension, variation or cancellation
of such permit.
(7) Unless otherwise exempted, a person constructing a borehole
shall keep a record of the progress of the work, which shall
include__
(a) measurements of the strata passed through and the
specimen of such strata;
(b) measurements of the levels at which water was struck; and
(c) measurements of the quantity of water obtained at each
level, the quantity finally obtained and the rest level of the water.
(8) A person to whom subsection (7) applies shall allow any
person authorized by the Authority, at any reasonable time__
(a) to have free access to the borehole;
(b) to inspect the borehole and the material excavated from it;
(c) to take specimens of such material and of water abstracted
from the borehole; and
(d) to inspect and take copies of or extracts from the record
required to be kept under this section.
(9) Where the person constructing a borehole on any land is not
the occupier of the land, the obligation to allow any person
authorized by the Authority to exercise his rights under this section
shall be the obligation of the occupier of the land as well as of the
person constructing or drilling a borehole.
No. 2
Water Resources
41


--- PAGE 42 ---

(10) The Authority may by notice, whether conditionally or
subject to specified conditions, exempt any person, in such circum-
stances as may be specified in the notice, from the operation of
subsections (7) and (8).
69.
A person constructing or drilling a borehole, if required to
keep records under this Part, shall, within one month of the
cessation of the construction, send to the Authority__
(a) a complete copy of the record, together with the specimens
referred to in the record; and
(b) particulars of any test made, before such cessation of the
construction, of the yield of water, specifying__
(i) the rate of flow throughout the test and the duration of the
test; and
(ii) where practicable, the water levels during the test and
thereafter until the water has returned to its natural level;
(c) a statement of whether, in his opinion (as determined by
tasting) the water is suitable for drinking or is highly mineralized,
as the case may be; and
(d) if required by the Authority, such water samples as it may
consider necessary.
70.__(1) Where any borehole is being constructed within eight
hundred metres of an existing borehole, the Authority may, by notice
require the person constructing the borehole to apply tests, to be
specified in the notice, to the existing borehole and to supply to the
Authority the particulars of the results of such tests including the
rate of pumping and rest levels of water.
(2) Where the borehole to which the tests are to be applied is
situated on the property of a person other than the person construct-
ing the borehole and the person constructing the well or borehole is
unable for any reason to apply the test, the Authority may, by notice,
require the person upon whose property the existing borehole is
situate to apply the tests to be specified in the notice to him, and to
supply to the Authority the particulars of the results of such tests.
71.
Where any contractor constructs or drills a borehole on land
belonging to or occupied by any other person, the contractor shall be
deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be the person
constructing or drilling the borehole, and he shall be jointly and
severally liable with the owner of the land to the discharge of the
obligations under section 69.
72.__(1) A person constructing or drilling a borehole or the owner
or occupier of the land on which construction takes place may give
notice to the Authority requesting that__
(a) any copy of, or extract from, the record required to be kept
under this Act; or
42
Water Resources
No. 2
Submission
of records
Tests on
neighbouring
boreholes
Contractor
deemed to be
constructor
Records may
be required to
be treated as
confidential


--- PAGE 43 ---

(b) any specimen taken or any other particulars connected with
the borehole,
be treated confidentially.
(2) In response to such a notice, the Authority shall, if sufficient
cause has been shown, thereupon not allow such copy, extract,
specimen or other particulars, except in so far as it contains or
affords information as to water resources or supplies, to be
published or shown to any person other than a member of the
Authority without the consent of the person giving the notice:
Provided that, if at any time the Authority gives notice to the
person that, in its opinion, his consent is unreasonably withheld__
(a) the person may, within three months after the notice given
by the Authority, appeal to the Water Tribunal; and
(b) if, at the expiration of that period, no such appeal has been
made or, after hearing the appeal, the Water Tribunal does not
make an order restraining it from doing so, the Authority may
proceed as if such consent had been given.
73.__(1) No person shall__
(a) cause any groundwater to run to waste from any borehole,
except for the purpose of testing the extent or quality of the
supply or cleaning, sterilizing, examining or repairing the
borehole;
(b) conduct the water from any borehole through any channel
or conduit so that more than twenty per cent (20%) of the water
is lost between the point of extraction and the point of use:
Provided that, where the water from any borehole is
conducted through channels or conduits together with water from
other sources, no person shall permit the waste of more than
twenty per cent (20%) of the water in conducting the water from
the point of extraction from the borehole to the point of use;
(c) use any water from any borehole for the purpose of
domestic use or the watering of stock, except where such water is
carried through pipes fitted with float valves or other satisfactory
means of control, to prevent waste:
Provided that, where groundwater interferes or threatens to
interfere with the execution or operation of underground works,
whether water works or not, the Authority may, in any particular
case, by notice permit such water to waste upon such conditions,
regarding quantity and method of disposal, as the notice may
specify.
74.
Every person abstracting groundwater by means of a
borehole shall, in order to prevent contamination or pollution of the
water__
No. 2
Water Resources
43
Waste of
groundwater
Contamination
and pollution
of
groundwater


--- PAGE 44 ---

(a) effectively seal off to a sufficient depth any contaminated or
polluted surface or shallow water in rock openings or soft broken
ground;
(b) effectively seal the top of the borehole between the
surface casing and the internal pump column, and the suction or
discharge pipe;
(c) dispose of all return or waste water by means other than by
return to the borehole;
(d) extend the borehole casing to a point not less than twenty
centimetres above the elevation of the finished pump house or
pump pit floor;
(e) use either welded or screw type borehole joints on the
casing, if made of metal;
(f) dispose of effluents or drainage from any household, stable,
factory, trade premises or other premises in such a manner as will
prevent any such effluent or drainage from reaching such seal or
groundwater; and
(g) carry out such other work as the Authority may by order
direct, from time to time, for the prevention of contamination or
pollution.
75.
If__
(a) during the construction of or drilling a borehole, water is
encountered in an aquifer;
(b) water from a water table or lower aquifer tends to flow
from the upper aquifer to the lower aquifer; and
(c) in the opinion of the Authority this is likely to prove
detrimental to the groundwater resources of the area,
the Authority may order what special measures shall be taken by the
owner of the borehole so that the water from the higher aquifer
cannot flow to the lower aquifer.
76.
Every artesian borehole and every sub-artesian borehole
shall be efficiently cased, capped or furnished with such appliances
as will readily and effectively arrest and prevent the flow therefrom
over the surface of the ground or wasting from the borehole through
the strata through which it passes.
77.__(1) Any borehole which encounters salt water, in this Part
referred to as a “defective borehole”, shall be securely cased,
plugged or sealed off by the owner of the borehole, so that the salt
water is confined to the strata in which it was found, and such
casing, plugging or sealing shall be done in such a manner as
effectively to prevent the salt water from escaping from the strata in
which it was found into any other water-bearing strata or on to the
surface of the ground.
44
Water Resources
No. 2
Authority may
order special
measures to
safeguard
groundwater
resources
Artesian
boreholes to
be cased
Defective
boreholes


--- PAGE 45 ---

(2) This section shall apply to boreholes constructed or drilled
before or after the commencement of this Act.
78.
Any person who re-cases or removes the plugs or seals from
a defective borehole, or deposits or causes or knowingly permits the
deposit of, any dirt, rubbish or other material in any such borehole,
except with the written permission of the Authority, commits an
offence.
79.__(1) Before any defective borehole is re-cased or the plugs
are removed, the owner of the borehole, or his duly authorized
representative, shall file with the Authority an application for
permission to carry out such re-casing or the removal of the plugs or
seals.
(2) The application shall contain such information as the
Authority may require in relation to__
(a) the name and address of the owner of the borehole;
(b) its location, depth and size;
(c) the amount and location of casing or sealing in the borehole;
(d) the distance below the surface of the ground to the water
level in the borehole;
(e) the strata penetrated;
(f) the distance from the surface of the ground to the top of the
salt water stratum and the thickness of the salt water stratum; and
(g) any other matter specified by the Authority in respect of the
borehole.
(3) The application shall also state the methods proposed for
re-casing, re-plugging or resealing of the borehole.
80.
The Authority, after consideration of any application under
section 79, may call for additional data, and may make such
investigation as it considers necessary, and if the borehole is found
to contain salt water, shall by order give instructions to the
applicant, specifying__
(a) the work that shall be done by the owner to place it in a
satisfactory condition; and
(b) the time that shall be allowed to complete the work, and
may inspect such work while it is in progress.
81.
The Authority may on its own initiative, or upon informa-
tion or complaint from any source, make an examination of any
borehole suspected of containing salt water, and may by order issue
instructions for curing any defects in the borehole.
82.__(1) Upon completion of the works in pursuance of any
instructions issued under this Act__
(a) the contractor who carries out the work; or
No. 2
Water Resources
45
Interference
with defective
borehole, etc.
Application to
carry out work
on a defective
borehole
Instructions
to deal with
defective
borehole
Authority may
inspect
borehole
Sworn
statements to
be submitted


--- PAGE 46 ---

(b) if the work is done without a contractor, the owner of the
borehole,
shall file with the Authority a statement sworn or affirmed
specifying in detail the manner in which such work was done.
(2) The statement shall be filed within thirty days after the
completion of the work.
83.__(1) Upon receipt of a statement under section 82, the
Authority shall determine, either from the statement or from
inspection or test, whether the work has been satisfactorily
performed.
(2) If the Authority determines that the work has not been
satisfactorily performed, it shall, by order, issue additional instruc-
tions specifying the additional work required to place the borehole
in a satisfactory condition, and specifying the time for the
completion of such additional work.
(3) Upon the completion of such additional work, a statement
sworn or affirmed shall be filed with the Authority as provided for
in section 82.
84.__(1) No person shall engage in the trade of drilling or
construction of boreholes unless the person is licensed as a borehole
driller or a borehole constructor in accordance with the provisions of
subsection (2).
(2) The Authority on application made to it in the prescribed
manner and after being satisfied that the applicant meets the require-
ments specified in subsection (3) shall issue the applicant with a
licence as a borehole driller or borehole constructor.
(3) The Minister shall prescribe the requirements including
professional qualifications, terms and conditions that any person
wishing to be issued with a licence as a borehole driller or borehole
constructor under subsection (2) shall comply with and the circum-
stances under which a licence may be cancelled or suspended.
PART VII__PROTECTED AREAS AND CONTROLLED ACTIVITIES
85.__(1) Where the Authority is satisfied that special measures
are necessary for the protection of a catchment area or part thereof,
notably from deforestation and from other land degradation
activities, it may, with the approval of the Minister, by order
published in the Gazette, declare such an area to be protected area.
(2) The Authority may impose such requirements, and regulate or
prohibit such conduct or activities, in or in relation to a protected
area as the Authority may think necessary to impose, regulate or
prohibit for the protection of the area and its water resources.
46
Water Resources
No. 2
Additional
work on
defective
borehole
Licensing of
borehole
drillers and
constructors
Protected areas


--- PAGE 47 ---

86.
The Minister may, in relation to any water source, where the
situation so requires due to shortage or anticipated shortage of water,
by notice published in the Gazette and in such other manner
appropriate for such area as the Minister may see fit, on the advice
of the Authority, declare any part of Malawi to be a controlled area
and establish a comprehensive and integrated plan for managing
land, water and other natural resources within that area.
87.__(1)
Activities
which
constitute
controlled
activities
include__
(a) irrigation of any land with waste water generated through
any industrial activity or a water work;
(b) an activity aimed at the modification of atmospheric
precipitation;
(c) artificial recharge of an aquifer with any waste or water
containing waste; and
(d) any activity regarded by the Minister as likely to have a
detrimental impact on water resources and declared by him as a
controlled activity.
(2) Before declaring an activity as a controlled activity the
Minister shall publish a notice in the Gazette__
(a) specifying the activity or class of activities proposed to be
declared;
(b) listing all activities previously already declared controlled
activities; and
(c) invite written comments on the proposed declaration to be
received by him not later than sixty days after publication of the
notice.
(3) No person shall undertake a controlled activity except under a
permit granted by the Authority under Part VIII of this Act, mutatis
mutandis.
PART VIII__PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF WATER POLLUTION
88.__(1) A person or public authority who, unless authorized
under this Part, causes or allows__
(a) effluent to come into contact with any water;
(b) effluent to be discharged directly or indirectly into water; or
(c) water to be polluted,
commits an offence.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions dealing with the
safeguarding of existing lawful uses of water, subsection (1) shall
apply to permits granted and works constructed before the
commencement of this Act.
No. 2
Water Resources
47
Controlled
areas in
relation to
drought
Controlled
activities
Prohibition
of pollution


--- PAGE 48 ---

(3) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection (1), proof
of the existence of a drain, pond, dump or other means by which
effluent may be conveyed, retained or deposited as to come into
contact, directly or indirectly, with water shall be prima facie
evidence of pollution of that water.
(4) A person or public authority contravening subsection (1)
through which damage is caused shall be liable to pay the cost of
remedying the damage caused and restoring the environment, as far
as is possible, to the condition that would have existed if the
damage had not been caused.
(5) Where a person or authority fails to comply with subsection
(4), the Authority may__
(a) apply to court for enforcement of compliance with the
provisions; or
(b) enter any land and take such measures as may be necessary
to ensure compliance with the provisions.
(6) In any proceedings under subsection (5), the court may, on
application by the Authority acting on its own initiative or at the
request of a catchment management committee or a Local
Authority, require that person or authority to pay into court a sum
not being less than one hundred per cent (100%) of the cost
estimated by the Authority of remedying the damage caused and
restoring the environment.
89.__(1) Any person who owns, controls, occupies or uses land
on which an activity or process is or was performed and which,
unless authorized under this Part, causes, has caused or is likely to
cause pollution of a water resource, shall take all such measures as
may be necessary to prevent any such pollution from occurring,
continuing or recurring.
(2) Measures referred to in subsection (1) may include__
(a) ceasing, modifying or controlling any activity or process
causing the pollution;
(b) complying with any prescribed effluent standard or waste
management practices;
(c) containing or preventing the movement of pollutants;
(d) eliminating any source of the pollution;
(e) remedying the effects of the pollution; and
(f) remedying the effects of any disturbance to the bed and
banks of a watercourse.
(3) The Authority may direct any person who fails to take the
measures required under subsection (1) or any one of them to__
48
Water Resources
No. 2
Pollution of
water resources
from an
activity or
process


--- PAGE 49 ---

(a) commence taking specific measures before a specific date;
and
(b) complete them before a specific date.
(4) If a person fails to comply or to comply adequately with a
directive given under subsection (3) the Authority may take the
measures it considers necessary to remedy the situation and recover
all costs incurred as a result thereof from the following persons__
(a) any person who is or was responsible for or who directly or
indirectly contributed to the pollution or the potential pollution;
(b) the owner of the land at the time when the pollution or the
potential pollution occurred or his successor in title;
(c) the person in control or in use of the land at the time
when__
(i) the activity or the process was performed, or
(ii) the situation existed; or
(d) any person who negligently failed to prevent__
(i) the activity or the process being formed;
(ii) the situation from arising; or
(e) any other person who, in the opinion of the Authority,
benefited from the measures undertaken by it under subsection
(4), to the extent of such benefit.
90.
The Authority shall prescribe a list of substances which
shall not be discharged under any circumstances under this Part.
91.
The Minister shall, after consultation with competent
authorities, prescribe standards of effluent quality with which
effluent discharges shall comply.
92.__(1) A person who wishes to discharge effluent shall apply to
the Authority for a discharge permit in the prescribed manner.
(2) The Authority shall, on receipt of an application under
subsection (1), give public notice of the application in the
prescribed manner.
(3) Any person with an interest in the outcome of the application
made under this section may give notice of objection to the
Authority in a manner and within the time prescribed.
(4) In determining whether or not to issue a permit to discharge
effluent, the Authority shall consider the following__
(a) whether the proposed discharge is consistent with the
National Water Resources Master Plan;
(b) the use of water from any source to which the discharge will
be made;
No. 2
Water Resources
49
Declaration
of prohibited
substances by
the Authority
Standards of
effluent
quality
Application
for effluent
discharge
permit


--- PAGE 50 ---

(c) the standards for waterborne contaminants adopted by a
competent authority;
(d) the impact of the discharge on existing water uses;
(e) the impact of the proposed discharge upon groundwater;
(f) any impact of the proposed effluent discharge upon the
environment, including owners and occupiers of land and water
resources in the vicinity of the proposed effluent discharge or
construction of effluent treatment facility or disposal site;
(g) the effect of the proposed effluent discharge on Malawi’s
obligations relating to shared watercources;
(h) the need to ensure the efficient and beneficial use of water
resources; and
(i) any additional criteria the Minister may prescribe.
93.
A permit to discharge effluent shall specify__
(a) the name and other details of the person to whom it is
granted;
(b) the location of the discharge;
(c) the location of the relevant effluent treatment facility, if any;
(d) the limits of any constituent elements of the discharge;
(e) requirements for waterproofing or covering the relevant
effluent treatment facility, if any;
(f) the duration of the permit, which shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of section 96;
(g) the conditions under which the permit is granted;
(h) the frequency of review of the permit; and
(i) whether the permit is subject to periodic review, suspension,
amendment or revocation under this Act.
94.
A permit to discharge effluent shall be issued subject to__
(a) the protection of any water resource to which the discharge
will be made as well as any existing or potential uses of the water
resource, including environmental uses, by__
(i) setting out the specific volume of effluents that may be
discharged;
(ii) setting out the rate of discharge;
(iii) specifying the concentration of certain constituents of
the effluent;
(iv) specifying the times, if any, when effluents may not be
discharged;
(v) specifying the locations where a discharge may, or may
not, be made; and
50
Water Resources
No. 2
Contents of
the permit
Terms and
conditions of
a discharge
permit


--- PAGE 51 ---

(vi) adding only such terms regarding the protection of the
water resource which the Authority may determine to be
appropriate;
(b) the protection of any water resource, including ground-
water, in the vicinity of a relevant effluent treatment facility, if
any, by__
(i) specifying the location of the effluent treatment facility;
(ii) limiting the type, volume, composition or concentration
of effluent discharged to the effluent treatment facility;
(iii) specifying the requirements for lining or covering the
effluent treatment facility;
(iv) specifying the requirements for operating, managing or
closing the effluent treatment facility; and
(v) adding any such terms for the protection of residents,
water uses or water resources in the vicinity of the effluent
treatment facility which the Authority may determine as
appropriate;
(c) proper efficient discharge management, which__
(i) requires the monitoring, analysis and reporting on every
discharge specifying the aspects of the discharge to be
monitored and reported and specifying the devices to be used
for such monitoring;
(ii) requires the preparation for the approval of the Authority
of an effluent discharge management plan;
(iii) requires the payment of charges;
(iv) may require the addition of any such terms regarding
proper
effluent
management
which
the
Authority
may
determine to be appropriate; and
(v) requires the protection of public health.
95.__(1) Where the Authority proposes to grant, or to amend the
terms of an effluent discharge permit, it shall refer the proposal,
together with a copy or summary of the application and appropriate
plans, specifications and other information to any relevant public
authority.
(2) A public authority to which a proposal is referred under
subsection (1) shall inform the Authority in writing within thirty
days after the day on which the proposal was referred to it__
(a) whether the proposal is supported or whether there are
objections to it; or
(b) whether, and if so, what special terms should be included in
the proposed permit or amendment.
No. 2
Water Resources
51
Reference
of permits
to other
authorities


--- PAGE 52 ---

(3) The Authority shall__
(a) take into account any report and comments received under
subsection (2);
(b) refuse to grant the proposed permit or make the proposed
amendment if a competent public authority submits a written
report objecting to the proposal on the grounds that public health
is likely to be endangered by the proposed permit or amendment;
and
(c) refuse to grant the proposed permit or make the proposed
amendment if an Environmental Impact Assessment carried out
pursuant to the provisions of the Environment Management Act
and the Environmental Impact Assessment Guidelines determines
that the environment is likely to be endangered by the proposed
permit or amendment.
96.__(1) The duration of a permit to discharge effluent may not
exceed a term of five years.
(2) Subject to sections 98 and 101, a permit to discharge effluent
expires at the end of its term of duration.
97.__(1) A permit to discharge effluent may be renewed at least
three months prior to its expiry if the permit holder submits an
application for renewal to the Authority in the prescribed manner.
(2) When considering an application for renewal submitted under
subsection (1), the Authority shall consider the application using the
criteria for determination of applications referred to in section 92.
98.__(1) The Authority, at any time during the duration of a
permit to discharge effluent, may review such permit and amend the
terms and conditions, if it considers it to be in the public interest.
(2) Before the Authority amends the terms and conditions of a
permit to discharge effluent under subsection (1), the Authority may
invite the permit holder to make representation in respect of the
amendment.
99.__(1) A holder of a permit to discharge effluent may apply to
the Authority for approval to transfer his permit to another person.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for transfer of a permit to
discharge effluent, the Authority shall__
(a) evaluate whether the terms and conditions of the proposed
transfer are consistent with the terms and conditions of the
permit;
(b) evaluate any deviation from the terms and conditions of the
permit that may have an adverse impact upon other persons or the
environment; and
52
Water Resources
No. 2
Cap. 60:02
Duration of
permit to
discharge
effluent
Renewal of
permit to
discharge
effluent
Review of
permit to
discharge
effluent
Transfer of
permit to
discharge
effluent


--- PAGE 53 ---

(c) give the proposed transferee and any interested persons an
opportunity
to
make
representations
with
regard
to
the
application, if they so wish.
(3) The Authority, within sixty days of receipt of the application
for a transfer of a permit to discharge effluent, may grant the
application, with or without additional conditions, or deny the
application.
100.
A permit to discharge effluent may pass to the named
person as a successor-in-title at death or transfer, but that passage of
the permit to a successor-in-title does not extend the duration of the
permit.
101.__(1) Subject to subsection (2), the Authority may cancel a
permit to discharge effluent, or suspend it in whole or in part, if__
(a) the permit holder fails to comply with this Act or any of the
terms or conditions of the permit;
(b) the permit holder fails to commence discharge operations or
effluent treatment facility construction operations within the
period stipulated in the permit;
(c) having commenced with the discharge of effluent or
construction of an effluent treatment facility, the permit holder
ceases the discharge or construction; or
(d) it is in the public interest to do so.
(2) The Authority may not suspend or cancel a permit referred to
in subsection (1), without giving the permit holder an opportunity to
make representations within thirty days of receipt of the notification
of the Authority’s intention to suspend or cancel such permit.
102.
If a permit to discharge effluent expires and is not
renewed, or is cancelled prior to its expiry, the Authority may__
(a) order the permit holder to restore, at the permit holder’s
expense, the state of affairs that existed before the permit was
granted, if doing so is reasonable and practicable under the
circumstances; or
(b) enter into an arrangement with the permit holder or any
other person for the maintenance of the effluent discharge works.
103.__(1) If an incident occurs in which a harmful substance
which may find its way into a water resource spills, then the person
responsible for the incident or the owner of the substance involved
in the incident or the one in control of the substance involved in the
incident at the time of the incident or any other person with
knowledge of the incident shall, as soon as reasonably practicable
after obtaining knowledge of the incident, report to__
No. 2
Water Resources
53
Succession to
permit to
discharge
effluent
Suspension
and cancella-
tion of permit
to discharge
effluent
Effects of
expiry or
cancellation
of permit to
discharge
effluent
Pollution
of water
resources
from spillage


--- PAGE 54 ---

(a) the Minister;
(b) the Authority;
(c) the Malawi Police Service or to the relevant District
Council; and
(d) the relevant catchment management committee.
(2) The person responsible for the incident, the owner of the
substance involved in the incident and the person in control of the
substance involved in the incident at the time of the incident shall__
(a) take all reasonable measures to contain and minimize the
effects of the incident;
(b) perform clean-up procedures;
(c) remedy the effects of the incident;
(d) take such measures within such specified time as the
Authority may either verbally or in writing direct; and
(e) compensate any affected community for any and all damage
suffered to life and property.
(3) Any verbal directive by the Authority shall be confirmed in
writing within fourteen days, otherwise the directive shall be
deemed to have been withdrawn.
(4) If the person specified in subsection (2) fails to comply or to
adequately comply with a directive of the Authority, or if the
Authority be unable to give the directive timeously it may itself take
the measures it considers necessary to__
(a) contain and minimize the effects of the incident;
(b) perform clean-up procedures; or
(c) remedy the effects of the incident.
(5) The Authority may recover all reasonable costs incurred by it
from the persons specified in subsection (2) jointly or severally as a
result of taking measures under subsection (4).
PART IX__GOVERNMENT WATERWORKS
104.__(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the National
Water Resources Master Plan prepared under Part IV the Authority
may for purposes of sustainable development of water resources
or the performance of any of its functions under this Act__
(a) construct, use or operate any works;
(b) abstract and impound the water from any watercourse or
borehole, or
(c) alter the course of any watercourse.
54
Water Resources
No. 2
Powers of
Authority to
undertake
works


--- PAGE 55 ---

(2) Any land needed for purposes of subsection (1) may be
acquired in any manner provided by law for the acquisition of land
for public purposes.
105.__(1) In this Part__
“community project” means a project operating under a licence
for one or more purposes which are__
(a) connected with the use of water or the drainage of land
situated entirely or for the most part, within a given area; and
(b) classified by the Authority, with the approval of the
Minister, as community purposes,
which has been declared by the Authority by notice published in
the Gazette, to be a community project for the purposes of the
Act;
“state scheme” means__
(a) a scheme, whether formulated in detail or not, for the use
for any public purpose of the whole or part of a water resource;
or
(b) a scheme for draining any land,
which has been declared by the Minister after consultation with
the Authority, by notice published in the Gazette, to be a state
scheme for the purposes of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of the definition of “state scheme” in
subsection (1), “public purpose” includes any of the following__
(a) the supply of water, or of electrical energy derived from the
energy of moving water, to the public or any section of the
public;
(b) the drainage or reclamation of lands;
(c) the protection of any water resource, its source or
catchment;
(d) identification and development of a retarding basin for the
control and management of flood water or any other measures for
its control or disposal;
(e) the conservation or improvement of water quality;
(f) the distribution and allocation of water among the
beneficiaries of the scheme;
(g) the measurement of water; or
(h) the storage or impoundment of water for purposes of bulk
distribution, including the construction of reservoirs for impound-
ing surface run-off and for regulating stream flows.
No. 2
Water Resources
55
State schemes
and
community
projects


--- PAGE 56 ---

106.__(1) A state scheme shall take precedence over all other
schemes for the use of water or the drainage of land.
(2) A community project shall take precedence over all other
schemes for the use of water or the drainage of land, except a state
scheme.
(3) The Minister__
(a) may direct that a state scheme or community project be
executed in augmentation, modification or improvement and,
subject to the provisions of this Act, so as to supersede any other
works for the use of water; and
(b) may at any time order that any works contemplated or under
execution or completed be aided from public moneys to such
extent as may be appropriated by Parliament.
107.__(1) The Authority may, after reasonable notice to any
landholder concerned, construct and maintain upon any land such
works as it may deem necessary or desirable for the purposes of any
state scheme.
(2) Compensation on just terms shall be payable by the
Government to the owner of the land on which any such works are
constructed, but in assessing the amount of compensation payable,
the Minister shall take into consideration any benefit accruing to the
land by the construction of the works and any adverse effect on the
land caused by the works, as the case may be.
(3) The cost of construction and maintenance of any such works
shall be paid out of moneys appropriated by Parliament.
108.__(1) The Authority shall not issue a licence to abstract and
use water to a community project unless__
(a) the proposed project is approved by the persons owning or
occupying
at
least
two-thirds
(2/3)
of
the
particular
area
concerned in the project; and
(b) provision is made by the project for any adequate alternative
supply of water to be supplied to permit holders likely to be
adversely affected and unable to benefit from the scheme.
(2) No licence for a community project shall be cancelled or
varied except with the consent of the Minister.
109.
Any person who, in the opinion of the Minister, will
benefit from the scheme or project shall, if the Minister so
determines, contribute towards the cost of the state scheme or
community project in cash or in kind.
56
Water Resources
No. 2
Precedence of
schemes and
projects
Construction
of works for
state schemes
Community
projects
Contribution
towards
schemes and
projects


--- PAGE 57 ---

PART X__SAFETY OF DAMS AND FLOOD MANAGEMENT
110.__(1) In this Part__
“approved professional person” means a person registered
under the Engineers Act, and National Construction Industry Act,
and approved by the Authority after consultation with the
Engineers Board and the National Construction Industry Council
as the case may be;
“dam” includes any existing or proposed structure which is
capable of containing, storing or impounding water, including
temporary impoundment or storage, whether that water contains
any substance or not;
“dam with a safety risk” means any dam__
(a) which can contain, store or dam more than 50,000 cubic
metres of water, whether that water contains any substance or
not, and which has a wall of a vertical height of more than five
metres, measured as the vertical difference between the lowest
downstream ground elevation on the outside of the dam wall
and the non-overspill crest level or the general top level of the
dam wall;
(b) belonging to a category of dams declared under section
112 (2) to be dams with a safety risk; or
(c) declared under section 112 (3) (a) to be a dam with a
safety risk;
“owner of a dam” or “owner of a dam with a safety risk”
includes the person in control of that dam; and
“task” includes a task relating to designing, constructing,
altering, repairing, impounding water in, operating, evaluating the
safety of, maintaining, monitoring or abandoning a dam with a
safety risk.
111.__(1) No person shall engage in any construction activity that
blocks or otherwise impedes the flow of water in a watercourse
unless a licence authorizing the activity has been obtained in
accordance with the provision of Part V of this Act.
(2) Subsection (1) shall apply regardless of whether an activity
is directly instrumental to the abstraction of water from the
watercourse or not:
Provided however that, if the activity is directly instrumental to
the abstraction of water from the watercourse, the relevant abstrac-
tion licence shall imply an authorization to carry out a construction
activity under this section.
No. 2
Water Resources
57
Definitions
Cap. 53:03
Cap. 53:05
Blockage of
watercourses


--- PAGE 58 ---

(3) The Authority may take all reasonable measures to remove or
to mitigate the effects of an unauthorized blockage of a watercourse
and may recover the cost of such measures from the person or
persons responsible for the blockage.
(4) Any person responsible for causing the unauthorized blockage
of a watercourse shall be responsible for any damage to persons,
property, or the environment caused by the unauthorized blockage,
which damage shall be determined and assessed by a court of law.
(5) The Authority may bring an action for damage against any
person or persons responsible for the blockage of a watercourse, for
the purpose of compensation for any damage to the environment
caused by the blockage.
112.__(1) An owner of a dam shall__
(a) before submitting an application for a licence under Part V
or within the period specified, provide the Authority with__
(i)
any
information,
drawings,
specifications,
design
assumptions,
calculations,
documents,
copies
of
the
Environmental Impact Assessment Report and test results
requested by the Authority; and
(ii) a copy of the Environmental Impact Assessment Report
and certificate issued in accordance with the Environment
Management Act; and
(b) give any person authorized by the Authority access to the
dam, to enable the authorized officer to determine whether__
(i) the dam is a dam with a safety risk;
(ii) the dam should be declared to be a dam with a safety
risk;
(iii) a directive should be issued for specific repairs or
alterations to the dam; or
(iv) the owner has complied with any provisions of this Act
applicable to the dam.
(2) The Authority may by notice published in the Gazette declare
a category of dams to be dams with a safety risk.
(3) The Authority may__
(a) direct the owner of a dam with a safety risk to submit, at the
owner’s cost, and within a period specified by the Authority, a
report by an approved professional person regarding the safety of
that dam; and
(b) direct the owner of a dam with a safety risk to undertake, at
the owner’s cost, and within a period specified by the Authority,
any specific repairs or alterations to that dam which are necessary
to protect the public, property or the resource quality from a risk
of failure of the dam.
58
Water Resources
No. 2
Control
measures
for dams with
safety risk
Cap. 60:02


--- PAGE 59 ---

(4) The Authority shall afford affected persons the opportunity to
petition for the review and evaluation of any dam reasonably
believed to be a dam with a safety risk and shall provide the owner
of any dam that is the subject of such a petition, a right to respond.
(5) If the owner of the dam fails to comply with the directive
contemplated in subsection (3) (b), within the period specified, the
Authority may undertake the repairs or alterations and recover the
costs from the owner.
(6) Before issuing a directive, the Authority shall__
(a) be satisfied that the repairs or alterations directed are
necessary, adequate, effective and appropriate to reduce the risk
to an acceptable level; and
(b) consider the impact on public safety, property, the resource
quality and socio-economic aspects if the dam fails.
113.__(1) When carrying out a task under this Part, an approved
professional person also has a duty of care towards the Government
and the general public.
(2) An approved professional person appointed to carry out a task
on a dam shall__
(a) ensure that the task is carried out according to acceptable
dam engineering practices;
(b) keep the prescribed records;
(c) compile the prescribed reports; and
(d) where the task includes constructing, altering or repairing a
dam, issue a completion certificate to the owner of the dam to the
effect that the task on that dam has been carried out according to
the applicable design, drawings and specifications.
(3) An approved professional person appointed to carry out a dam
safety evaluation shall__
(a) consider whether the safety norms pertaining to the design,
construction, monitoring, operation, performance and mainte-
nance of the dam satisfy acceptable dam engineering practices;
and
(b) compile a report on the matters contemplated in (a) accord-
ing to the prescribed requirements and submit the signed and
dated report to the owner of the dam within the prescribed period.
114.__(1) The owner of a dam with a safety risk shall register that
dam with the Authority.
(2) An application for registration shall be made within one
hundred and twenty days__
No. 2
Water Resources
59
Responsibi-
lities of
approved
professional
persons
Registration
of dams with
safety risk


--- PAGE 60 ---

(a) after the date on which the dam with a safety risk becomes
capable of containing, storing or impounding water;
(b) after the date on which an already completed dam is
declared to be a dam with a safety risk; or
(c) after publication of a notice declaring a category of dams to
be dams with a safety risk, as the case may be.
(3) A successor-in-title to an owner of a dam with a safety risk
shall promptly inform the Authority of the succession, for the
substitution of the name of the owner.
115. In declaring a category of dams or a dam to be a
category of dams or a dam with a safety risk, the Authority shall
consider__
(a) the need to protect the public, property and the resource
quality against the potential hazard posed by the dam or category
of dams;
(b) the extent of potential loss or harm involved;
(c) the cost of any prescribed measures and whether they are
reasonably achievable;
(d) the socio-economic impact if such a dam fails;
(e) in the case of a particular dam, also__
(i) the manner in which that dam is designed, constructed,
altered,
repaired,
operated,
inspected,
maintained
or
abandoned;
(ii) the person by whom that dam is designed, constructed,
altered,
repaired,
operated,
inspected,
maintained
or
abandoned; and
(iii) the manner in which the water is contained, stored or
impounded in that dam.
116.__(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, exempt a dam belonging to a certain category, by notice
published in the Gazette, from compliance with any provision of this
Part or any regulation made under this Act, on conditions
determined by the Minister on the recommendation of the Authority.
(2) The Minister may withdraw the exemption or impose further
or new conditions in respect of the exemption.
(3) Before recommending an exemption, the Authority shall
consider__
(a) the degree of risk or potential risk posed by the dam or
category of dams to public safety, property and the resource
quality;
60
Water Resources
No. 2
Factors to be
considered in
declaring
dams with
safety risk
Exemptions


--- PAGE 61 ---

(b) the manner of design, construction, alteration, repair,
impoundment of water in, operation or abandonment of the dam
or category of dams;
(c) the supervision involved in the dam or category of dams;
(d) alternative measures proposed for regulating the design,
construction, alteration, repair, operation, maintenance, impound-
ment of water in, inspection or abandonment of the dam or
category of dams and the effectiveness of these measures;
(e) the knowledge and expertise of the persons involved in any
task relating to the dam or category of dams;
(f) comments solicited from the surrounding communities;
(g) the costs relating to the dam or category of dams;
(h) any security provided or intended to be provided for any
damage which could be caused by the dam or category of dams;
(i) recommendations made in an environmental impact
assessment or an environmental audit report; and
(j) whether the dam or category of dams are permitted in terms
of a licence or any other authorization issued by or under any
other Act.
117.__(1) The Minister may make regulations regarding dam
safety including__
(a) the establishment of a register of approved professional
persons for dealing with dams with a safety risk;
(b) the provision of technical audit of the work of approved
professional persons;
(c) classifying dams into categories;
(d) standard specifications regarding the construction, mainte-
nance and repair of dams;
(e) requiring the owner of a dam with a safety risk to
accomplish regular monitoring of the dam, to the extent and in the
manner prescribed;
(f) requiring the registration of a specific dam with a safety
risk, and setting out the procedure and the processing fee payable
for registration;
(g) requiring an approved professional person appointed for a
specific purpose for a specific dam to submit information,
drawings, reports and manuals; and
(h) specifying time periods that shall be complied with.
(2) In making regulations under subsection (1), the Minister shall
consider__
No. 2
Water Resources
61
Regulations
regarding dam
safety and
prevention
of flood risk


--- PAGE 62 ---

(a) the expertise required for the effective design, construction,
alteration, repair, operation, maintenance and abandonment of a
dam in the category concerned; and
(b) the qualifications and experience needed to provide the
expertise for a particular category of tasks.
(3) Before making regulations under subsection (1), the Minister
shall consult the relevant professional categories and any other
appropriate statutory bodies.
118. For the purpose of preventing or minimizing the risk of
flooding and flood damage, the Authority may do any of the
following__
(a) prohibit the construction on submersible lands or dikes,
levees or other structures likely to hinder the run-off of flood-
water; provided that authorization may be granted for the
development of such structures if they are determined to be
necessary for the protection of already existing residences or
other private structures;
(b) alter or demolish dikes, embankments, levees, structures or
other works, irrespective of their legal status, if they are
determined by the Authority to hinder water run-off or to extend
the flood plain with harmful results;
(c) prohibit the growing of crops, the building of structures or
the placing of deposits on land located between a watercourse and
any protective dikes, embankments or levees;
(d) cooperate with Local Authorities in determining the
geographic extent of floodplain areas and assist such Authorities
in regulating the development and use of lands within such areas;
and
(e) in consultation with the Ministry responsible for Local
Government, develop regulations providing for the control
and management of storm water within municipal areas.
PART XI__WATER CHARGES AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
119.__(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, by notice published in the Gazette, prescribe charges
for__
(a) services provided by the Minister, the Authority, a public
authority or authorized person under this Act;
(b) the abstraction and use of water under a licence granted
under this Act;
(c) the discharge of effluents under a discharge permit granted
under this Act; or
(d) any other licence or permit granted under this Act.
62
Water Resources
No. 2
Measures
for flood
mitigation
and control
Charges


--- PAGE 63 ---

(2) The water abstraction charges determined by the Minister
shall be based on a pricing strategy that takes into consideration__
(a) the need to differentiate among geographical areas,
categories of water uses and water users;
(b) the need to achieve an equitable and efficient allocation of
water and water conservation;
(c) the need to adhere to sound water management practices
based on the “user pays” and the “polluter pays” principles; and
(d) the need to provide for incentives for timely payment of the
charges and disincentives for non-payment of same.
120.__(1) The Authority shall levy and collect charges and fees
prescribed under section 119 (1) and it shall deposit the proceeds
from the collection thereof into a separate account owned and
operated by the Authority.
(2) A percentage of the proceeds from the collection of water
charges and fees, to be determined on a yearly basis by the Minister
on the recommendation of the Authority, shall be earmarked for use
by the catchment management committees for their statutory
purposes and paid out to them on request:
Provided that such percentage shall in no case be less than
twenty per cent (20%) of the total amounts collected in any one year.
(3) The Authority shall apply the balance of the proceeds from the
collection of charges in the pursuit of its statutory purposes.
(4) The Authority shall submit yearly to the Minister an audited
statement of accounts under this section.
121.__(1) There is hereby established a fund to be known as the
Water Resources Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Fund”).
(2) The objective of the Fund is to assist in financing the
conservation and management of water resources in Malawi.
(3) There shall be paid into the Trust Fund__
(a) such moneys as may be appropriated by Parliament for the
purposes of the Fund;
(b) such moneys as may be received by the Fund from
donations, grants, and bequests from whatever source; and
(c) such other moneys as may, by or under any Act, be payable
to the Fund.
(4) The Fund shall be managed by trustees from time to time
appointed and holding office under a trust deed, to be drawn-up by
the Minister.
No. 2
Water Resources
63
Collection and
use of water
fees and
charges
Water
Resources
Trust Fund


--- PAGE 64 ---

(5) The trustees shall develop and apply principles governing the
grant of moneys from the Fund and for achieving the objective of
the Fund.
(6) There shall be paid from the Fund such grants as the trustees
may, from time to time, authorize in furtherance of the objective of
the Fund.
PART XII__WATER TRIBUNAL
122.__(1) There is hereby established a tribunal to be known as
the Water Tribunal.
(2) The Water Tribunal shall have jurisdiction throughout Malawi,
with power to conduct hearings anywhere in Malawi.
123.__(1) The Water Tribunal shall consist of the following
persons appointed by the Minister__
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson; and
(c) three other persons.
(2) The Minister shall appoint the Chairperson, and the Deputy
Chairperson of the Water Tribunal on the recommendation of the
Judicial Service Commission, provided that the Chairperson shall be
a person qualified to hold the office of a judge of the High Court of
Malawi.
(3) Only persons with knowledge of law, engineering, water
resources management or related field, may be appointed to the
Tribunal.
(4) A member of the Water Tribunal shall hold office for a period
of five years and may be reappointed for one more period of five
years.
(5) The terms and conditions of the members of the Water
Tribunal shall be determined by the Minister in consultation with the
Minister of Finance.
124.__(1) The office of a member of the Water Tribunal shall
become vacant if the member__
(a) dies or resigns;
(b) becomes bankrupt;
(c) adjudged or declared to be of unsound mind;
(d) is convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment; or
(e) has had his appointment terminated in accordance with
subsection (2).
64
Water Resources
No. 2
Establishment
of Water
Tribunal
Composition
of the Water
Tribunal
Vacancy in the
office of a
member of the
Water Tribunal


--- PAGE 65 ---

(2) The Minister may, after consultation with the Judicial Service
Commission and after giving the member an opportunity to make
representations and after considering those representations, for good
reason terminate the appointment of any member of the Water
Tribunal.
125.__(1) Administrative support for the Water Tribunal shall be
provided by officials of the Ministry responsible for water affairs.
(2) Expenses of the Water Tribunal shall be paid out of money
appropriated by Parliament for that purpose.
126.
The Water Tribunal and the members of the Water Tribunal
shall not be liable for an act or omission committed in good faith in
the course of performing their functions under this Act.
127.__(1) An appeal shall lie to the Water Tribunal at the instance
of any aggrieved person who has a right or proprietary interest
which is directly affected by a decision or order of the Authority, the
Minister or a catchment management committee concerning any
matter regarding water resources management, a permit or licence
under this Act, and the Water Tribunal shall hear and determine any
such appeal.
(2) In addition, the Water Tribunal shall have such jurisdiction to
hear and determine disputes, and shall have such other powers and
functions, as may be conferred or imposed on it by or under this or
any other written law.
128.
No appeal shall be entertained by the Water Tribunal
unless it is lodged, where no period is so prescribed, within thirty
days after the date on which written notice was served on the
appellant notifying him of the decision or order against which he
wishes to appeal:
Provided that the Water Tribunal may in any case, for good cause
shown, admit an appeal after the time limited for lodgment of an
appeal has expired.
129.__(1) In proceedings on any matter before it, the Water
Tribunal shall have and may exercise all the powers vested in
Commissioners under the Commissions of Inquiry Act.
(2) In determining an appeal, the Water Tribunal may affirm,
quash or vary the decision or order concerned, as justice requires.
(3) In determining a dispute, or in exercising any other function,
the Water Tribunal shall decide the matter on the merits of the case
and may make such order as, in its judgment, will do justice between
the parties.
No. 2
Water Resources
65
Support staff
and funds of
the Water
Tribunal
Indemnity of
the Tribunal
and its
members
Jurisdiction
of the Water
Tribunal
Time for
lodging appeal
Determination
of appeals and
disputes
Cap. 18:01


--- PAGE 66 ---

(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Water Tribunal
may apply to the High Court for judicial review:
Provided that on a matter of law, an appeal shall lie to the High
Court.
130. The Water Tribunal shall determine its own procedures
and rules for or with respect to the lodgment, hearing and disposal
of appeals and other matters before it.
PART XIII__ASSOCIATIONS OF WATER USERS
131.__(1) An association of water users (hereinafter called an
“association”) may be established by the agreement of the simple
majority of a group of water users, at their initiative or also at the
initiative of the Authority, for one or a combination of the following
purposes__
(a) to manage, distribute and conserve water from a source
used jointly by the members of the association;
(b) to manage groundwater resources in a Groundwater
Conservation Area established under Part VI;
(c) to acquire and operate an abstraction licence or a discharge
permit under this Act;
(d) to resolve conflicts between members of the association
related to the joint use of a water resource;
(e) to collect water user charges and fees on behalf of the
Authority; and
(f) to represent the special interests and values arising from
water used for a public purpose, such as in an environmental or
conservation area.
(2) A group of water users for the purpose of subsection (1) shall
comprise any user of water from a common stream or other source
irrespective of the purpose of that use.
132.__(1) The proposed members of an association shall prepare
a constitution in the form set out in the Schedule hereto and submit
such constitution to the Authority for approval in accordance with
the procedure as the Minister may prescribe in regulations made
under this Act.
(2) The Minister may, by regulation, amend the constitution set
out in the Schedule hereto.
(3) Upon request of a group of water users intending to establish
an association, the Authority shall provide assistance in formulating
the constitution.
66
Water Resources
No. 2
Rules and
procedures
of the Water
Tribunal
Establishment
and purposes
of associations
of water users
Approval and
registration of
associations of
water users


--- PAGE 67 ---

(4) A management committee shall be the executive organ of the
association and shall be elected and have the powers as set out in the
constitution prepared under subsection (1).
133.__(1) Upon approval by the Authority of the constitution
prepared under section 132, the association shall be registered in the
Register maintained by the Authority in accordance with section
134.
(2) With effect from the date of registration in the Register, all
water users within the area of an association as defined in the
constitution shall be required to become members of the association
and shall be bound by the constitution.
(3) Any person who has reasonable grounds to object to
becoming a member of an association of water users under subsec-
tion (2) shall lodge an appeal to the Minister in accordance with the
provisions of section 142.
(4) The Authority shall cause membership of an association to be
recorded on the abstraction licence or on the effluent discharge
permit of each member issued in accordance, respectively, with
Parts V and VIII of this Act and in the Register maintained by the
Authority in accordance with section 134.
134.__(1) The Authority shall establish and maintain a Register in
which it shall record the particulars of associations registered with
the Authority.
(2) The Authority may determine additional particulars of
associations registered with the Authority to be included in the
Register.
(3) Information contained in the Register shall be accessible by
the public on payment of prescribed fee.
135.
In any case where the Authority is satisfied that an associ-
ation does not perform its functions satisfactorily, it may give
directions to the association relating to the performance of the
functions of the association. Such directions may refer to__
(a) the division and distribution of water amongst the members
of an association;
(b) the management and protection of any water source;
(c) the drainage of the land where water is used; and
(d) any other matter which the Authority considers necessary or
desirable.
136.__(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, by notice published in the Gazette, disestablish an
association of water users__
No. 2
Water Resources
67
Registration of
associations
of water users,
compulsory
membership
implied
Register of
associations of
water users
Power of
Authority
to give
directions
Disestablish-
ment of
associations
of water users


--- PAGE 68 ---

(a) in the circumstances provided for in the constitution of the
association;
(b) if it is in the best interest of the association or its members;
(c) if an investigation of its affairs or financial position reveals
that disestablishment is appropriate;
(d) if the Authority has taken over a power or duty of the
association as a result of dissensions among the management
committee or its members; or
(e) if the association is no longer active or effective.
(2) Before disestablishing an association of water users the
Minister shall__
(a) publish a notice in the Gazette__
(i) stating the intention to disestablish the association of
water users;
(ii) setting out the reasons for disestablishing the association
of water users; and
(iii) inviting written comments on the proposal, which
comments shall be submitted by a date which may not be
earlier than sixty days after the publication of the notice; and
(b) consider all comments received by the specified date.
(3) Upon disestablishment of an association of water users, the
Authority shall enter a corresponding record in the Register it keeps
under section 134, and on the abstraction licence or on the effluent
discharge permit of each member, issued in accordance with Parts V
and VIII of this Act, respectively.
137.__(1) When an association of water users is disestablished, its
affairs shall be wound-up__
(a) as provided for in its constitution; or
(b) by a person appointed by the Minister in accordance with
directives given by the Minister if the constitution does not
provide for winding-up.
(2) The costs of winding-up an association of water users shall be
a cost against the estate of the association.
(3) If the affairs of an association of water users are wound-up,
the Minister may direct that an amount equivalent to any financial
contribution with interest made to the association from public funds
be reimbursed, before assets are distributed among the members of
the association.
(4) No transfer duty, other tax or duty is payable in respect of the
transfer of any assets under subsection (3).
68
Water Resources
No. 2
Winding-up
of affairs of
associations
of water users


--- PAGE 69 ---

PART XIV__MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
138.__(1) An employee or agent of the Authority, on the instruc-
tions of the Authority, may without warrant enter onto any land and
inspect any water resource located within or accessible from the
land concerned, in order to take such measures as the Authority may
think fit for the purpose of__
(a) conserving or regulating the water resource, or preserving it
from pollution or protecting the bed over which it lies or flows;
(b) removing any obstruction from, or for clearing and
deepening, the bed; or
(c) preventing the illegal diversion, waste or pollution of the
water resource or interference with any such bed.
(2) A person authorized by the Authority may enter and remain on
land for purposes of performing functions or exercising powers
conferred under this Act and may take such measures and construct
or operate works as may be necessary for the investigation,
monitoring, use, control, protection, management or administration
of water resources.
(3) Subject to section 152, an authorized person may enter any
land for the purpose of investigating water resources and may__
(a) construct works;
(b) install and equip gauging, recording and monitoring
stations;
(c) investigate or monitor boreholes and ancillary works on any
land;
(d) make surveys;
(e) take measurements or samples; or
(f) make alterations or remove any of the above.
(4) Whatever is attached to land does not become part of the land
for the purposes of giving the owner or occupier of land a
proprietary interest in it.
139.__(1) In exercising the powers under section 138, the
authorized person shall__
(a) cooperate, as much as possible, with the owner or occupier
of the land;
(b) stay on the land only for as long as it is reasonably
necessary;
(c) remove from the land, on completing any works, all plant,
machinery, equipment, goods or buildings brought on to the land,
other than anything that the owner or occupier of the land agrees
may be left there; and
No. 2
Water Resources
69
Entry by
Authority for
monitoring
of water
resources
Obligations on
entry on land


--- PAGE 70 ---

(d) leave the land as nearly as possible in the condition
in which it was prior to the entry being made.
(2) Subject to section 138 (1) an authorized person shall not enter
on to the land or premises without first giving reasonable notice,
whether written, verbal or otherwise, to the landholder or other
responsible person in charge of the land or premises, and any such
entry shall be at a reasonable hour:
Provided that an authorized person may enter without giving
notice if__
(a) he has reason to believe that a provision of this Act or of
any regulation or order made under this Act has been or is about
to be contravened;
(b) he is unable to give notice within a reasonable time having
regard to all the circumstances; or
(c) he has reasonable grounds for not giving notice.
(3) If so requested by the owner or occupier of the land or
premises, the authorized person shall produce evidence of his right
or permission, as the case may be, to enter on to the land.
(4) It shall be the duty of any person exercising any powers under
this section to do so with the reasonable care and in such manner as
to cause as little damage as possible in so doing.
140.__(1) An inspector may enter land for purposes of__
(a) inspecting works or use of water; or
(b) taking samples or making tests, to find out whether__
(i) water is being wasted, misused or polluted;
(ii) the terms of any water permit, waste discharge permit or
any other permit granted under this Act are being complied
with; or
(iii) an offence is being committed against this Act,
regulation or an order made under this Act is otherwise being
complied with.
(2) An inspector may, without warrant, enter any land or
premises for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is or has been
any contravening of the provisions of this Act or of any regulation
or order made under this Act in relation to any water resource.
141.__(1) The Minister, acting in consultation with other relevant
Ministers, may establish bodies to implement__
(a) international agreements relating to the management and
development of water resources; or
70
Water Resources
No. 2
Inspection of
land in relation
to water use
Establishment
of bodies to
implement
international
agreements


--- PAGE 71 ---

(b) regional agreements relating to the management and
development of water resources shared with other countries in the
promotion of regional cooperation over shared water resources.
(2) Whenever it appears to the Minister expedient to do so, he
may consult with his counterpart within the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) on matters relating to water
resources management in line with the SADC Protocol on Shared
Watercourses.
(3) The Minister may share relevant information with other state,
regional and international organizations regarding water and water
research, subject to the limitations such as requirements of state
security.
142.__(1) Except as otherwise provided under this Act, any
person aggrieved by a decision of the Authority, authorized person
or public authority made under this Part of the Act may, within one
month, appeal to the Minister in a prescribed manner.
(2) A person who fails, without reasonable cause or neglected to
exercise his right of objection under this Act, shall not have a right
to appeal under subsection (1).
(3) Where a person is still aggrieved with the decision of the
Minister, he may appeal to the Water Tribunal.
143.
A person who neglects or fails to comply with any order or
requirement given or imposed on him by or under this Act commits
an offence and on conviction shall be liable to a fine of one
million Kwacha (K1,000,000) and to four (4) years imprisonment.
144.__(1) Any person who diverts, dams, stores, abstracts or uses
water or constructs or maintains any waterworks or in any way
interferes with the flow of watercourse other than in accordance
with a right granted under this Act commits an offence and, upon
conviction shall be liable to a fine of five million Kwacha
(K5,000,000) and to eight (8) years imprisonment.
(2) Any person who discharges effluents in contravention to the
provisions of this Act commits an offence and upon conviction shall
be liable to a fine of ten million Kwacha (K10,000,000) and to
ten (10) years imprisonment.
(3) Any person who fails to comply with a notice given by the
Authority requiring him to take measures specified therein to avoid
or mitigate damage to water resources commits an offence and shall
be liable to an administrative penalty.
(4) Any person who continues to exercise a water right
previously granted to him after suspension or variation of the same
by the Minister commits an offence and shall be liable to an
administrative fine.
No. 2
Water Resources
71
General
appeals
General
offence and
penalty
Specific
offences


--- PAGE 72 ---

(5) Any person who continues to exercise a water right
previously granted to him after determination or diminution of the
same by the Minister commits an offence and shall be liable to an
administrative penalty.
(6) Any person who fails to comply with any condition, express
or implied, subject to which a right was granted or who abstracts or
uses water for a purpose other than the one authorized in the grant,
commits an offence and shall be liable to an administrative fine and
in addition to any requirement which the Minister may impose.
(7) Any person who prevents, obstructs or refuses entry upon his
land by the Authority or any member or agent thereof for purposes
of inspecting any works thereon or ascertaining the amount of water
being abstracted commits an offence and shall be liable to an
administrative penalty.
(8) Any person who refuses, fails or neglects to demolish or to
change the use of waterworks as required of him by the Authority
commits an offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty
and in addition to any suspension of right which the Authority may
impose.
(9) Any person who refuses, fails or neglects to demolish any
unlawfully constructed works after being ordered by the Authority
to demolish the same commits an offence and shall be liable to an
administrative fine and where the Authority demolishes the
unlawful works, the Authority shall recover all expenses incurred as
a civil debt from the person.
(10) Any person who, after being ordered by the Authority to
modify or to demolish works previously constructed under a right
which has been determined, refuses, fails or neglects to do so
commits an offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty.
(11) Any person who prevents, constructs or refuses entry upon
his land by the Authority or any member or agent thereof for the
purposes of conducting investigations and surveys commits an
offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty.
(12) Any person who interferes with or damages a hydrometeoro-
logical
station,
water
quality
station,
hydrological
station,
hydrogeological station, groundwater monitoring station or any
equipment thereof of works connected therewith commits an
offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty and if the
equipment or works, as the case may be, have been damaged so as
to require replacement or reconstruction, the person responsible
shall be liable further to pay the costs of replacement or reconstruc-
tion, as the case may be.
72
Water Resources
No. 2


--- PAGE 73 ---

(13) Any person who prevents, obstructs or refuses entry upon
any land by a representative or agent of a catchment management
committee for the purposes specified under this Act commits an
offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty.
(14) Any person who refuses or fails to submit himself to the
jurisdiction of a catchment management committee by refusing,
failing or neglecting to comply with directions, rules, regulations,
by-laws or guidelines of the catchment management committee
commits an offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty.
(15) Any person who fails to provide the Minister within the time
specified by him with any data, information, documents or
materials required by the Minister under this Act commits an
offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty.
(16) A water management institution which fails to make informa-
tion at its disposal available to the public under this Act commits an
offence and shall be liable to an administrative penalty.
(17) Any person who undertakes a controlled activity without a
permit granted under this Act commits an offence and shall be liable
to an administrative penalty and the controlled activity undertaken
shall thereupon be forthwith stopped by the Minister.
145.__(1) No person shall__
(a) wilfully obstruct, molest or hinder any inspector or other
employee of or person authorized by the Minister or the Authority
acting in the exercise or performance of his powers and functions
under this Act;
(b) without the written permission of the Authority, knowingly
or wilfully__
(i) deface, alter or remove; or
(ii) cause to be defaced, altered or removed,
any survey mark, water gauge, weir or measuring device or other
work, structure or appliance installed with the approval of the
Authority for the purposes of water control or investigation;
(c) wilfully hinder or interrupt, or cause to be hindered or
interrupted, any permit holder, or his employee, contractor or
agent, in the lawful exercise or performance of any powers and
functions under this Act;
(d) without lawful authority, wilfully let off or discharge water
from the works of any permit holder so that the permit holder
loses the use of that water;
(e) without lawful authority, lay, erect or construct, or cause to
be laid, erected or constructed, any work to connect with the work
of any permit holder which is capable of drawing water from that
work;
No. 2
Water Resources
73
Miscellaneous
offences


--- PAGE 74 ---

(f) unlawfully interfere with the works or water supply of any
permit holder; or
(g) neglect or fail to comply with any lawful order given under
this Act.
(2) A person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1)
commits an offence.
(3) Any person who__
(a) causes or allows water to be wasted or misused; or
(b) takes or uses water for a purpose other than provided by
the water permit,
commits an offence.
(4) Any person who__
(a) assaults, threatens, resists, obstructs, hinders or delays the
authorized person or a public authority in the performance of
any function or duty under this Act; or
(b) allows or encourages another person to do any of the acts
under paragraph (a),
commits an offence.
(5) Where a person is convicted under subsection (2), the court
may, in addition to any other penalty, order that person to pay, by
way of compensation, any person who may have suffered any
damage as a result of the action for which that person is convicted.
(6) Any person who__
(a) interferes;
(b) attempts to interfere; or
(c) allows another person to interfere, with any hydrological
station,
commits an offence.
146. Without prejudice to the rights of any person to bring
proceedings in respect of an offence, the Minister or the Authority
may, subject to section 148, institute and maintain criminal proceed-
ings in any court against any person accused of an offence under this
Act or under any rules or regulations made under this Act.
147.__(1) Any person convicted of an offence under this Act, or
under any regulations or rules made under this Act for which no
other penalty is provided shall be liable to a fine of one million
Kwacha (K1,000,000) and to four (4) years imprisonment and where
the person continues the contravention, shall be liable to a fine of
five thousand Kwacha (K5,000) for every day during which the
offence continues.
74
Water Resources
No. 2
Proceedings
for offences
Penalties for
offences


--- PAGE 75 ---

(2) A person who is convicted of the same offence subsequently
shall be liable to a fine of ten million Kwacha (K10,000,000) and
to ten (10) years imprisonment and where the person continues the
contravention, shall be liable to a fine of twenty thousand Kwacha
(K20,000) for each day during which the offence continues.
(3) Where under this Act penalty is provided for a continuing or
subsequent offence, the penalty shall apply__
(a) in the case of a continuing offence, if the person continues
to contravene the provision for which he was convicted after the
date on which he was convicted; or
(b) in the case of a subsequent offence, if the person
contravenes the same provision for which he was convicted
earlier.
148.__(1) If the Authority is satisfied on reasonable grounds that
a person has contravened this Act, the Authority may impose
administrative penalties on the person by doing one or more of the
following__
(a) giving the person a written warning;
(b) directing the person to do a specified act, or refrain from
doing a specified act, for one or more of the following purposes__
(i) to remedy the effects of the contravention;
(ii) to compensate persons who have suffered loss because of
the contravention;
(iii) to ensure that the person does not commit further
contravention;
(c) requiring the person to pay monetary penalty of two million
Kwacha (K2,000,000); or
(d) requiring the person to pay monetary penalty of ten
thousand Kwacha (K10,000) for each day during which the
contravention continues.
(2) Before taking action under subsection (1), the Authority shall
give the person written notice of the proposed action, specifying the
grounds for it and the facts supporting those grounds, and allowing
twenty-one days after the notice is given for the person to ask for a
hearing on the matter. If the person requests a hearing on the matter,
the Authority shall hold a hearing before taking the action. The
hearing shall be held in private unless the person consents to the
hearings being held in public.
(3) A person on whom an administrative penalty has been
imposed and who fails or refuses to comply with the administrative
penalty commits an offence and, on conviction shall be liable to a
fine of five million Kwacha (K5,000,000) and to five (5) years
imprisonment.
No. 2
Water Resources
75
Administrative
penalties


--- PAGE 76 ---

(4) Where the administrative penalty imposed by the Authority is
a monetary penalty and the person on whom the monetary penalty
has been imposed does not pay the monetary penalty for more than
thirty days from the date of the initial demand in writing by the
Authority, the amount in respect of the monetary penalty shall be
recoverable by the Authority as a civil debt.
149.__(1) Where it is necessary to establish, for the purposes of
this Act, the state of mind of a body corporate in relation to
particular conduct, it is sufficient to show that__
(a) the conduct was engaged in by a director, employee or
agent of the body corporate within the scope of his actual or
apparent authority; and
(b) the director, employee or agent had the state of mind.
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to the state of mind of a person
includes a reference to__
(a) the knowledge, intention, opinion, belief or purpose of the
person; and
(b) the person’s reasons for the intention, opinion, belief or
purpose.
(3) A reference in this section to engaging in conduct includes a
reference to failing or refusing to engage in conduct.
150. Where an offence against a provision of this Act or
regulations made hereunder is committed by a body corporate, each
director of the body corporate also shall be guilty of the offence and
on conviction shall be liable to the same penalty unless it is
established that he took reasonable precaution and exercise due
diligence to avoid the commission of the offence.
151. Where a body corporate is convicted of an offence under
this Act, the court may, if the court thinks fit, impose a
pecuniary penalty not exceeding an amount equal to five times the
amount of the maximum pecuniary penalty that could be imposed by
the court on an individual convicted of the same offence.
152.__(1) Where damage is caused to land through the exercise of
powers conferred upon the Minister, the Authority or an authorized
officer by this Act, the Government shall compensate all parties
having an interest in that land.
(2) For purposes of this section, damage to land includes__
(a) deprivation of possession of the surface land;
(b) damage to the surface of land and any improvements, trees
or crops;
(c) damage to stock; or
76
Water Resources
No. 2
Offences
by bodies
corporate
relating to
state of mind
Offences
by bodies
corporate
relating to
liability of
directors
Penalties for
offences by
bodies
corporate
Damage caused
by the Minister,
etc., to be
compensated


--- PAGE 77 ---

(d) all consequential damage.
(3) Compensation under this section may be__
(a) in the form of money;
(b) provision of an alternative supply of water;
(c) exchange of land for another piece of public land; or
(d) any other type of compensation which the Minister may
consider appropriate.
(4) In calculating monetary compensation__
(a) for damage to land under this section;
(b) in respect of compulsory acquisition of any interest in land.
153.
The Minister may, on the advice of the Authority, from
time to time, prescribe guidelines to be followed by any authorized
person or public authority while exercising their powers under this
Act.
154.
While exercising his powers and functions under this Act,
the Minister, Authority, authorized person or any other person shall
have regard to__
(a) the objectives of this Act;
(b) any relevant international agreement regulating the use of
water to which Malawi is a party;
(c) the provisions of the water action plan;
(d) any policy of the Government concerning the decentraliza-
tion of administrative responsibilities;
(e) any guidelines prescribed by the Minister under this Act;
and
(f) any delegation that may have been made by the Minister.
155.
No matter or thing done or omitted to be done by__
(a) the Minister, the Authority, a catchment management
committee or the Water Tribunal;
(b) any person acting under the direction of the Minister; or
(c) any member of or person acting under the direction of the
Authority, the catchment management committee, the Water
Tribunal authorized under this Act,
shall, if the matter or thing was done or omitted in good faith for the
purpose of executing this Act or any rule, regulation or order made
under this Act, subject the Minister or any such member of the
Authority, Committee, or Water Tribunal or person in his personal
capacity to any action, suit, claim or demand whatsoever.
No. 2
Water Resources
77
Prescribed
guidelines
Decision to be
in regard to
objectives
Protection of
the Minister
and others
from liability


--- PAGE 78 ---

156.__(1) A requirement imposed by or under this Act for a
person (in this section called the “designated person”) to undertake
public consultation in relation to any application made, or action
proposed to be taken, under this Act shall be construed as a require-
ment to ensure that this section is complied with in relation to that
application or action.
(2) The designated person shall publish or broadcast, as the case
may be, a notice, in relation to the application or proposed action__
(a) in the Gazette;
(b) in at least one national newspaper circulating in the area to
which the application or proposed action relates; and
(c) in at least one local radio station broadcasting in that area.
(3) The notice shall, in each case__
(a) set out a summary of the application or proposed action;
(b) state the premises at which the details of the application or
proposed action may be inspected;
(c) invite written comments on or objections to the application or
proposed action;
(d) specify the person or body to which any such comments are to
be submitted; and
(e) specify a date by which any such comments are required to be
received, not being a date earlier than thirty days after publication of
the notice.
(4) The designated person shall make arrangements for the public
to obtain copies, at reasonable cost, of documents relating to
the application or proposed action which are in the possession of the
designated person.
(5) The designated person shall consider__
(a) any written comments received on or before the date
specified under subsection (3) (e); and
(b) any comments, whether in writing or not, received at any
public meeting held in relation to the application or proposed action
at which the designated person was represented, or pursuant to any
other invited to comment.
(6) The designated person shall publish, through the same media
as were employed pursuant to subsection (2), notice of the fact that
a copy of the decision in writing of the designated person in relation
to the application or proposed action, and of the reasons therefor, is
available for public inspection at the same premises as were notified
under subsection (3) (b).
78
Water Resources
No. 2
Public
consultation


--- PAGE 79 ---

(7) Where regulations made under this Act so require, the
designated person shall cause a public meeting to be held in relation
to the application or proposed action.
157.__(1) The Minister may make regulations, not inconsistent
with this Act, for or with respect to any matter which by this Act is
required or permitted to be prescribed, or which is necessary or
expedient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this
Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), such
regulations may make provision for or with respect to__
(a) abstraction of groundwater and works therefor;
(b) inspection of works;
(c) plans and specifications to be submitted by applicants under
this Act;
(d) charges for water use under a permit and fees for licences;
(e) forms to be used under this Act;
(f) provide for the registration of existing users of water and
structures;
(g) the duration, granting, amending, renewing, suspending,
varying or cancelling of permits or licences as the case may be, or
any other conditions;
(h) provide for and regulate the making of objections and the
time in which objections shall be made;
(i) provide for the prevention of waste, misuse or pollution of
water;
(j) providing for the formation, functions and conduct of
associations of water users;
(k) for safety in dam construction; and
(l) generally for the better carrying out of the provisions of this
Act.
(3) The Authority may make rules, not inconsistent with this Act,
for or with respect to any matter which by this Act is required or
permitted to be prescribed by the Authority.
(4) Notwithstanding section 21 (e) of the General Interpretation
Act, the regulations or rules made under this section may create
offences in respect of any contravention of the regulations or rules
and may, for any such offences, impose a fine of up to two hundred
and fifty thousand Kwacha (K250,000) and to imprisonment for
two (2) years.
No. 2
Water Resources
79
Regulations
Cap. 1:01


--- PAGE 80 ---

PART XV__REPEALS, SAVINGS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
158. At the commencement of this Act__
(a) no person shall sink any borehole or use any water pursuant
to the provisions of the Mines and Minerals Act without a permit
to construct or to drill a borehole issued under section 68 of this
Act, and without a licence to extract groundwater issued under
section 39;
(b) no consent for alluvial or river locations under the
provisions of the Mines and Minerals Act shall be given without
the prior written approval of the Authority, and any consent given
shall be subject to conditions that the Authority may require;
(c) reference to the Minister in so far as it relates to issues
relating to water resources in the Mines and Minerals Act shall be
deemed to be a reference to the Minister under this Part of the
Act;
(d) the provisions dealing with works and uses existing before
the commencement of this Act shall apply to existing permits and
rights to use water granted under the Mines and Minerals Act
exercised by the Minister and the Authority in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.
159.__(1) Every person claiming an existing right shall, within
twelve months from the date on which this Act comes into
operation, notify the Authority of such claim.
(2) Every existing right shall determine if the person entitled
thereto fails to notify the Authority in accordance with subsection
(1).
160.__(1) Where the Authority receives a notification under
section 159, it shall carry out investigations to verify the existence
of the right and if satisfied shall record such right and issue a licence
in respect thereof.
(2) Where an existing right has been recorded and a correspond-
ing licence issued in accordance with subsection (1), the existing
right shall be subsumed by such licence and dealt with in the
manner prescribed for abstraction licences under Part V.
161. Wherever the provisions of this Act are inconsistent with
the provisions of__
(a) the Environment Management Act;
(b) the Fisheries Management and Conservation Act;
(c) the Forest Act;
(d) the Inland Shipping Waters Act;
(e) the Waterworks Act;
80
Water Resources
No. 2
Transitional
provisions
Cap. 61:01
Cap. 61:01
Cap. 61:01
Cap. 61:01
Notification of
existing rights
Authority to
record existing
rights and to
issue licence
Application of
other relevant
laws
Cap. 60:02
Cap. 66:05
Cap. 63:01
Cap. 71:01
Cap. 72:01


--- PAGE 81 ---

(f) the Mines and Minerals Act; or
(g) any other written law,
the provisions of this Act shall apply.
162.__(1) The Water Resources Act is hereby repealed.
(2) Any subsidiary legislation made under the Act repealed under
subsection (1) in force immediately before the commencement of
this Act__
(a) shall remain in force unless in conflict with this Act and be
deemed to be subsidiary legislation made under this Act; and
(b) may be repealed or amended by subsidiary legislation made
under this Act.
SCHEDULE
MODEL CONSTITUTION OF AN ASSOCIATION OF WATER USERS
(s. 132)
1.
The Constitution of the Association of Water Users:
There is hereby formed the Association of Water Users (hereinafter referred
to as the “Association”).
The Association, including its management committee, shall have the status
of a legal person and in that capacity it shall be capable of suing and being
sued.
The liability of any venture of the Association shall be limited.
The members of the Association shall be villagers, institutions, companies,
committees and government authorities or any person natural or legal, as
may be users of water from sources located within the area of operation of
the Association.
2.
The objects of the Association:
The objects of the Association shall be to__(delete those not applicable)
(a) manage, distribute and conserve water from a source used jointly by the
members of the Association;
(b) to construct, rehabilitate, operate and maintain any works for the
purposes of management of the water resource in its area of operation;
(c) arbitrate in the resolution of conflicts among holders of water abstraction
licences and/or effluent discharge permits within its area of operation;
(d) agree by consensus of its members equitable reductions in the quantities
of water abstracted from the source under its responsibility in times of
drought or other restrictions on resource availability;
No. 2
Water Resources
81
Cap. 61:01
Repeal and
savings
Cap.72:03


--- PAGE 82 ---

(e) obtain and operate any water abstraction licence and/or
effluent discharge permit or any other permit under the
provisions of the Water Resources Act;
(f) do such other things as may be considered necessary by a
majority of its members in order to manage the water resources
in its area of operation in a fair and equitable manner in
accordance with the intent and provisions of the Water
Resources Act.
3.
The area of operation of the Association:
The area of operation of the Association shall be as shown on the attached
map.
4.
Annual General Meeting and Extraordinary General Meetings:
An annual general meeting shall be held at least once each year, not more
than fifteen months following the previous annual general meeting. An
extraordinary general meeting of the Association may be called by five per
cent of members giving two weeks notice to the Secretary in writing.
One-third of the full number of members representing no fewer than four
from each of the upper and the lower area of the catchment or from each
village present shall constitute a quorum.
Voting can be exercised by a member or proxy in favour of another member
provided the proxy form is in the hands of the Secretary prior to the
meeting.
Decisions at the annual general meeting shall be made by simple majority
vote, including decisions on the assessments to be levied of members and on
the budget of the Association.
5.
Management Committee:
A management committee shall be elected at the annual general meeting of
the Association and shall consist of six elected members from among the
membership of the Association.
The committee so elected may sue and be sued in the name of the
Association for moneys or otherwise, and shall have the powers to bind the
Association by contract.
The committee shall collect and receive any moneys due to the Association
and pay moneys owed by the Association from time to time and open and
maintain a bank account through its authorized officers and submit such
annual audited accounts to the Annual General Meeting and to the National
Water Resources Authority.
The management committee shall meet not less than once in each quarter of
the year and all elected members must be present.
82
Water Resources
No. 2
Cap. 72:03
Cap. 72:03


--- PAGE 83 ---

The management committee shall decide by a two-thirds majority vote.
The management committee shall also decide the extent, manner and time of
levying the assessments laid down by the annual general meeting of the
Association.
The management committee shall appoint and employ such employees as
may be necessary to fulfil the purposes of the Association.
6.
Liability of members:
The liability of members is limited to the amount of unpaid charges and
interest thereon owing by them to the Association.
7.
Liability of Association:
The Association shall not be liable for any indebtedness other than that
contracted
by
its
management
committee
in
conformity
with
this
constitution.
8.
General duties of members:
Each member hereby undertakes with other members and each of them as
follows__
(a) to pay all assessments levied against him/her by the Association;
(b) not to draw from the source more water than the amount specified in the
member’s abstraction licence, or as determined by the committee if this
is the object of the Association, and, in general; and
(c) to observe the rules of the Association.
Passed in Parliament this fifth day of March, two thousand and thirteen.
H. H. NJOLOMOLE
for: Clerk of Parliament
No. 2
Water Resources
83
