

--- PAGE 1 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
1
CHAPTER 549
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION ACT
To make provision for the protection of the environment and for the
establishment of an authority with powers to that effect and for matters
connected therewith or ancillary thereto.
31st January, 2016;
4th April, 2016*
ACT I of 2016, as amended by XXIII of 2018.
PART I
Preliminary
Short title and 
commencement.
1.
(1)
The short title of this Act is the Environment
Protection Act.
(2)
This Act shall come into force on such date as the Minister
may by notice in the Gazette establish, and different dates may be
so established for different provisions or different purposes of this
Act.
(3)
A notice under sub-article (2) may make such transitional
provisions as appear to the Minister to be necessary or expedient in
connection with the provisions thereby brought into force.
Interpretation.
Amended by:
XIII.2018.2
2.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
"application" means a permission application or authorisation
application submitted in the manner prescribed by the Authority;
"application report" means the final permission application
report or authorisation application report;
"the Authority" means the Environment and Resources Authority
established under article 6 and includes any body or other person
acting on its behalf under powers delegated by the Authority under
this Act, and the Minister may, by order in the Gazette, designate
different bodies or persons as a competent authority for different
provisions and different purposes of this Act or any regulations
made thereunder;
"biological diversity" or "biodiversity" means the variability
among living organisms from all sources, including, inter alia,
terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological
complexes of which they are part, and includes diversity within
species, between species and of ecosystems;
"the Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Authority
appointed in terms of article 6;
"the Chief Executive Officer" shall mean such an officer so
* articles 1, 2, 6, 7, 9 to 30 and 35 to 38 were brought into force as from 31st January
2016 by Legal Notice 50 of 2016;
articles 3, 4, 5, 8, 31, 32, 39 to 44, 48 to 87 and the Schedule were brought into
force as from 4th April, 2016 by Legal Notice 106 of 2016.


--- PAGE 2 ---

2
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
appointed who is vested with the executive management of the
Authority;
"conservation" means a series of measures required to maintain
or restore the natural habitats and the population of species of wild
fauna and flora at a favourable status, and for cultural heritage
means any activity required to maximize the endurance or
minimize the deterioration of any cultural property as far as
possible and includes examining, testing, treating, recording and
preserving any such cultural property or any part thereof;
"derivatives" means parts of any specimen, whether processed by
man or not;
"discharge" includes emission, deposit, dumping, disposal,
addition or introduction into the environment of a substance or
energy directly or indirectly from any point source or diffuse
source, whether stationary or mobile, and whether caused or
permitted intentionally or otherwise and whether continuous or
intermittent or once only;
"entity of Government" means a body corporate established by
law or a company in which the Government or such body corporate,
or a combination thereof has a controlling interest or which is a
subsidiary of such a company;
"environment" means the whole of the elements and conditions,
natural or man-made, whether together or in isolation, and in
particular:
(a)
the air, water, land, soil and sea, including their
bedrock, aquifers and subsurface features;
(b)
all the layers of the atmosphere;
(c)
all biodiversity; and
(d)
the landscape and its features;
"fauna" means all types of animals and other biota including
akaryotes, prokaryotes and eukaryotes, dead or alive, in whole or in
part and their derivatives;
"flora" means all types of plants and other biota including
akaryotes, prokaryotes and eukaryotes, dead or alive, in whole or in
part and their derivatives;
"functions" includes responsibilities, powers and duties;
"Gazette" means the Government Gazette;
"genetically modified organism" means any of the following:
(a)
an organism derived from the formation of a
combination of genetic material by any means other
than natural means;
(b)
an organism inheriting such combination of genetic
material;
(c)
an organism that results from the replication of an
organism as derived in paragraph (a); or 
(d)
such other organism as may be prescribed by the
Minister under this Act;


--- PAGE 3 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
3
''guardianship'' and ''guardianship deed'' shall have the same
meaning as assigned to them in article 70A;
"land" includes the air, water, land, sea and soil, including their
bedrock, aquifers and subsurface features, and extends to the
proper use of resources found in such so as to ensure protection of
the environment in general and use of the air, water and soil in a
sustainable manner;
Cap. 363.
"local council" means a local council established under the Local
Councils Act;
"minerals" includes all minerals and substances (including oil
and natural gas) in or under land of a kind ordinarily worked for
removal by underground or surface working;
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for the environment;
"natural resources" means any component of nature and includes
air, water, land, soils, minerals, energy, living organisms and
genetic resources;
"officer" includes any employee or member of staff of the
Authority;
"person" means a body or other association of persons whether
granted legal personality or not and shall include Environmental
Voluntary Organisations;
"plan" means a plan approved in accordance with the provisions
of this Act;
"policy" means a policy approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Act;
"pollution" means the direct or indirect introduction by man, or
due to natural processes, into the environment of substances,
energy, organisms or genetic material that cause or are likely to
cause hazard to human health, or harm to living resources or to the
environment;
"precautionary principle" means the principle whereby
appropriate measures are taken to protect the environment and to
ensure sustainable management of natural resources in the absence
of absolute or conclusive scientific proof of the need for such
measures;
"prescribed" means prescribed by regulation, rule, order or other
instrument made as provided in the provisions of this Act
empowering the making of any such instrument;
"protected area" means all areas that are afforded protection
under this Act;
"public officer" has the meaning assigned to it by article 124 of
the Constitution;
"sea" includes the water column, seabed, marine sedimentary
subsoil, sediment and bedrock;
"specimen" means any species, whether alive or dead, any part or
derivative thereof, and includes any goods which from an
accompanying document, the packaging, mark or label or from


--- PAGE 4 ---

4
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
other circumstances appear to be parts or derivatives of animals or
plants;
"Standing Committee" means the Standing Committee on the
Environment and Development Planning established in terms of the
Development Planning Act;
"subsidiary plans" includes strategies, plans, programmes and
guidance under this Act;
"substances" means any matter, chemical, mixture, compound or
product, and includes fuels, combinations of elements, mixtures or
compounds of a chemical reaction, as well as the mixture of
substances of different molecular identities;
"Tribunal" means the Environment and Planning Review
Tribunal referred to in article 3 of the Environment and Planning
Review Tribunal Act;
"waste" means any thing, substance or object which the holder
discards or intends to discard, or is required to keep in order to
discard, and includes such other thing, substance or object as the
Minister may prescribe:
Provided that if a definition provided for under this article
is amended through a European, International or multilateral
directive or legislative instrument, the Minister shall have the
authority to amend such a definition in accordance with such a
directive or legislative instrument by means of a Regulation issued
under the provisions of article 54.
PART II
Duty to Protect the Environment
Duty of every 
person and entity 
to protect the 
environment.
3.
It shall be the duty of every person and entity, whether
public or private, to protect the environment and to assist in the
taking of preventive and remedial measures to protect the
environment and manage natural resources in a sustainable manner.
Duty of 
Government to 
protect the 
environment.
4.
(1)
It shall be the duty of the Government to protect the
environment for the benefit of the present and future generations
and to that effect:
(a)
to manage the environment in a sustainable manner by
integrating 
and 
giving 
due 
consideration 
to
environmental concerns in decisions and policies on
land use, socio-economic, educational and other
matters;
(b)
to take such preventive and remedial measures as may
be necessary to address and abate the problem of
pollution and any other form of environmental
degradation in Malta and beyond, in accordance with
the polluter pays principle and the precautionary
principle;
(c)
to collaborate with other governments and entities in
the protection of the global environment;
(d)
to disseminate information on the environment and to


--- PAGE 5 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
5
facilitate the participation of the public in decisions
that affect the environment;
(e)
to apply scientific and technical knowledge and
resources in determining matters that affect the
environment;
(f)
to ensure the sustainable management of wastes, to
promote the reduction of waste and the proper use, re-
use and recovery of matter;
(g)
to safeguard biological diversity;
(h)
to combat all forms of pollution and environmental
degredation;
(i)
to consider the environment as the common heritage
and common concern of mankind;
(j)
to provide incentives leading to a higher level of
environmental protection; and
(k)
to 
promote 
research 
and 
development 
in 
the
environmental field by different institutions.
(2)
In the course of its daily responsibilities, it shall be the duty
of every Government entity to implement the objectives and
provisions of this Act and its subsidiary legislation. In doing so,
Government entities shall also have regard to national
environmental targets when carrying out their respective plans,
programmes and projects.
Application of 
articles 3 and 4.
5.
The provisions of articles 3 and 4 shall not be directly
enforceable in any court, but the principles therein contained are,
this notwithstanding, fundamental to the Government of Malta and
those principles shall be employed in the interpretation of the other
provisions of this Act or of any other law relating to matters
governed by this Act.
PART III
1. Administration
Establishment of 
the Malta 
Environment 
Authority.
6.
(1)
There is hereby established an authority, to be known
as the Environment and Resources Authority, which shall consist of
not less than eight and not more than ten members, of whom one
shall be the Chairperson of the Authority.
(2)
Save as hereinafter provided, the members of the Board of
the Authority shall be appointed by the Minister as follows:
(a)
two public officers representing the Government, one
of whom has experience or qualifications in matters
concerning the environment, and another who has
experience or qualifications in matters concerning
environmental health or social policy;
(b)
six members (hereinafter called the "independent
members") shall be chosen from amongst persons of
known integrity and with knowledge of and experience
in:
(i)
the 
Environmental Voluntary 
Organisations


--- PAGE 6 ---

6
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
sector and who shall be nominated by the said
Voluntary Organisations; and
(ii)
the rest being persons with knowledge of and
experience in matters relating to the functions of
the authority, for good governance;
(c) a member nominated by the Leader of the Opposition.
(3)
The Chairperson of the Authority shall be chosen by the
Minister from amongst the independent members of the Authority.
(4)
Save as provided in sub-article (2), no person shall be
qualified to be appointed as, or remain, a member of the Authority
if he:
(a)
is a public officer:
Provided that the Chairperson shall not be considered
as a public officer for the purposes of this sub-article;
or
(b)
is an officer of any department, entity, Corporation or
Authority of the Government, provided that for the
purposes of this paragraph a member of the academic
staff of the University shall be excluded; or
(c)
is a Minister, Parliamentary Secretary or a member of
the House of Representatives, of the European
Parliament, or of a local council; or
(d)
is a judge or magistrate of the courts of justice; or
(e)
has a financial or other interest in any enterprise or
activity which is likely to affect the discharge of his
functions as a member of the Authority:
Provided that the Minister may determine that the
person’s interest is not likely to affect the discharge of
his functions and upon such determination that person
shall be qualified to hold the office of member of the
Authority provided that the declared interest and the
Minister’s determination are published in the Gazette;
or
(f)
is interdicted or incapacitated; or
(g)
is convicted of an offence affecting public trust, or of
theft or fraud, or of knowingly receiving property
obtained by theft or fraud or of bribery or of money
laundering; or
Cap. 386.
(h)
is subject to disqualification under article 320 of the
Companies Act.
(5)
The independent members shall hold office for such period,
being not less than three years, as may be specified in the letter
appointing them and if no such period is specified shall remain in
office for three years. In determining such period of office the
Minister shall, as far as practicable, ensure a measure of rotation.
(6)
Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-article (4), the
independent members may resign by letter addressed to the
Minister but may not be removed from office except by a resolution


--- PAGE 7 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
7
of the House of Representatives on the ground of misconduct or
inability to perform the duties of their office.
(7)
The other members of the Authority shall hold office until
they are replaced by the Minister, and as long as they remain public
officers.
(8)
A person who has ceased to be a member of the Authority
shall if he is otherwise qualified, be eligible for reappointment; but
no person shall in the aggregate be a member of the Authority for
more than seven years.
(9)
The Minister may by regulations establish the manner in
which the proceedings of the Authority shall be regulated.
(10) The Authority shall transmit a copy of the agenda, minutes
and relative enclosures of its meetings to the Minister for his
information.
Authority to be 
body corporate.
7.
(1)
The Authority shall be a body corporate having a
distinct legal personality and shall be capable, subject to the
provisions of this Act, of entering into contracts, of acquiring,
holding and disposing of any kind of property for the purposes of
its functions, of suing and being sued, and of doing all such things
and entering into all such transactions as are incidental or
conducive to the exercise or performance of its functions under this
Act, including the lending or borrowing of money.
(2)
The legal and judicial representation of the Authority shall
vest in the Chairperson:
Provided that the Authority may appoint any one or more of
its other members or any one or more of its officers to appear in the
name and on behalf of the Authority in any proceedings and in any
act, contract, instrument or other document whatsoever, or in the
case of any vacancy in the post of Chairperson.
(3)
In the absence of the Chairperson, or if the Chairperson is
unable to perform the functions of his office, whether under this or
any other provision of this Act, any one of the deputy chairpersons
shall perform those functions and shall rotate the chairpersonship
of the Authority between them as far as practical.
Functions of the 
Authority.
8.
(1)
The Authority shall be the principal means whereby the
Government shall implement its duties under this Act.
(2)
The functions of the Authority shall be:
(a)
to perform and succeed in the functions, assets, rights,
liabilities and obligations of the competent authority
established under the provisions of article 6 of the
Environment and Development Planning Act and
under the provisions of article 3 of the Malta
Resources Authority Act in so far as such functions,
assets, rights, liabilities and obligations refer to the
role of the competent authority established under the
said Act in relation to the protection and management
of the environment and sustainable management of
natural resources, and the prevention, mitigation,


--- PAGE 8 ---

8
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
offsetting or remediation of adverse effects on the
environment;
(b)
to formulate and implement policies relating to the
protection and management of the environment and the
sustainable management of natural resources, and on
such other matters as may be necessary for the better
carrying out of the provisions of this Act;
(c) to carry out and or commission surveys, studies,
assessments, investigations, audits, monitoring and
promote research on any matter relating to the
environment and the natural resources regulated by or
under this Act;
(d)
to provide information and issue guidelines to the
public and to commercial and other entities on matters
relating to the environment and the said natural
resources;
(e)
to establish measures for the protection of the
environment and to promote the efficient use of natural
resources in, and through, the practices, operations,
activities and functions regulated by or under this Act;
(f)
to ensure that national and international obligations
relative to the matters regulated by or under this Act
are entered into force and complied with;
(g)
to permit, assess, investigate, audit, monitor, and take
action on, any activity, intervention, project, operation
or land use that may have an effect on the
environment;
(h)
to advise the Minister on international legislation and
on the formulation of national policy in relation to
matters regulated by this Act and on matters having a
bearing on this;
(i)
otherwise to advise the Minister on any matter
connected with its functions under this Act;
(j)
to carry out, review or request others to carry out
environmental assessments, environmental audits and
environmental monitoring of activities and works
having an impact on the environment;
(k)
to perform such other functions as may from time to
time be assigned to it by the Minister.
(3)
In carrying out its functions under sub-article (2) the
Authority shall:
(a)
seek to co-operate or to make arrangements with other
entities or persons to enable it to better implement or
monitor the implementation of and compliance with
the provisions of this Act;
(b)
establish long and short term objectives and strategies;
(c)
make or advise the Minister on the making of
environmental standards, guidelines and the making of
regulations, plans and policies under this Act as well


--- PAGE 9 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
9
as advise on the formulation and implementation of
contingency and emergency plans, led by other
authorities, to safeguard the environment;
(d)
issue or withhold any authorisation or conduct or
oversee any assessment, monitoring or other action
that may be required by or under this Act under such
conditions as it may, subject to any other provision of
this or any other law, deem necessary to control and
manage 
activities 
having 
an 
impact 
on 
the
environment or which may potentially impact the
environment;
(e)
establish 
threshold 
levels 
of 
discharge 
from
production, management, use, possession or any other
activity involving products and substances, their waste
products and pollution;
(f)
monitor the quality of the environment and for such
purpose establish indicators and methodologies, and
maintain and disseminate information related to the
environment; and
(g)
publish, at intervals not more than four years, a report
on the state of the environment.
(4)
For these purposes, and subject to the provisions of this
Act, the Authority shall be responsible for:
(a)
ensuring that environmental audits, environmental
assessments and environmental monitoring as may be
prescribed are properly carried out;
(b)
the preparation of the plans and policies including any
other matter ancillary, incidental or conducive thereto,
and the updating thereof following their approval in
terms of this Act;
(c)
the conduct of consultations with Government, public
entities, 
local 
councils, 
non-governmental
organizations, private organizations and international
organizations 
and 
other 
persons 
relating 
to
environmental 
protection 
and 
the 
sustainable
management of the environment and natural resources,
and to undertake and promote research on such
matters;
(d)
the provision of support and advisory services relating
to environment protection, to Government and local
authorities in relation to the performance of their
functions;
(e)
the provision of, either alone or in collaboration with
others, education, training and public awareness
programs 
relating 
to 
environmental 
protection,
conservation and the sustainable management and
monitoring of the environment;
(f)
the publication and updating, as circumstances may
warrant, of an official manual containing such matters
as the Minister may prescribe and which shall be made


--- PAGE 10 ---

10
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
available to the public, provided that:
(i)
no policy or amendment thereto approved in
terms of article 51 shall have effect unless it is
approved in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and published in the official manual;
(ii)
a policy or an amendment thereto, as the case
may be, shall be published in the official manual
within one month from the date of its approval in
terms of this Act;
(iii)
the official manual may be published and
updated in electronic form or in any other format
as the Authority may approve;
(g)
the performance of such other functions as may from
time to time be assigned to it by the Minister,
including the functions required to give effect to any
international 
obligation, 
including 
European
obligations and bilateral agreements entered into by
Malta relative to matters regulated by this Act.
(5)
In the execution of its functions under this Part and Part V, the
Authority shall consult with the Minister, and it shall have and may
exercise all or any one of more of the powers vested in it or entrusted to
it by this Act. 
(6)
The Authority may also exercise all powers of control over
the environment as may from time to time be delegated to it in
writing by the Minister on behalf of any department or entity of
Government.
(7)
It shall be the Minister’s function to ensure that the
Authority is fully informed of Government’s strategic directions
relative to the environment, and to monitor the proper execution of
such policies.
(8)
The Authority shall execute its duties, functions and
responsibilities in accordance with Government’s strategic
directions relating to the environment as well as such policies
relating to the environment as are applicable to Malta.
(9)
In the pursuance of its functions under this Act, the
Authority shall, as far as possible, make reference to European best
practices and emulate them.
(10) The Authority shall also ensure that it keeps an audit trail of
all its processes, including all documentation and reports.
(11) The Authority may require any holder of environmental
information to provide it with any information, including financial
information that the Authority considers necessary for the purpose
of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act, regulations
prescribed thereunder and decisions or directives made in
accordance with this Act, regulations prescribed thereunder or any
other law which the Authority is entitled to enforce. Any person
who fails or refuses to provide such information shall be in
contravention of this Act and shall be liable to the imposition of an
administrative fine as may be prescribed by the Authority.


--- PAGE 11 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
11
Delegation of 
power. 
9.
Subject to retaining overall control and supervision, and
otherwise observing the provisions of this Act, the Authority may,
with the approval of the Minister, delegate any one or more of its
functions under this Act under such conditions as it may deem
appropriate. Notice of any such delegation shall be published in the
Gazette. The Authority shall have the right to retract such
delegation at its sole discretion with immediate effect.
Appointment of 
advisory boards 
and committees.
10.
The Authority may, with the approval of the Minister,
appoint advisory boards and committees to assist it in the
performance of its functions under this or any other law. The
functions of the said boards and committees shall be prescribed by
the Authority with the approval of the Minister.
Conduct of the 
affairs of the 
Authority. 
11.
(1)
The Authority shall, after a public call, appoint a Chief
Executive Officer. Such appointment shall be for a period of three
years which may be extended for further periods of three years
each.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall be responsible for the
implementation of the objectives of the Authority in the exercise of
its functions and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing shall -
(a)
assume full responsibility for the overall supervision
and control of the Directorates;
(b)
with the approval of the Authority, assign to the
Directorates such duties which are by, or in accordance
with, the provisions of this Act vested in such
Directorates;
(c)
co-ordinate the workings of the Directorates;
(d)
develop 
the 
necessary 
strategies 
for 
the
implementation of the objectives of the Authority;
(e)
advise the Authority on any matter it may refer to him
or on any matter on which he considers his advice
necessary or expedient; and
(f)
carry out such other functions and duties as the
Authority may assign to him from time to time.
(3)
The Chief Executive Officer shall not be a member of the
Board of the Authority. He shall however have the right to attend
meetings of the Board of the Authority to report to the said Board.
(4)
The Chief Executive Officer may be dismissed by the Authority
at any time for a just cause and it shall be a just cause if the Authority
determines that he has not achieved the targets and objectives set for him
by the Authority.
Appointment of 
officers.
12.
(1)
Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, any other
enactment applicable thereto, and without prejudice to the other
provisions of this Act, the employment and appointment of officials
and other officers of the Authority shall be made by the Authority
and the terms and conditions of their employment and appointment
shall be established by the Authority with the concurrence of the
Minister.


--- PAGE 12 ---

12
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(2)
The Authority may, with the approval of the Minister given
after consultation with the Minister responsible for finance,
establish a scheme or schemes, whether by contributory or non-
contributory arrangements or a mix of both, for the payment of
pensions, gratuities and other like benefits to its officers on their
retirement, death or injury, or to their dependants.
Disclosure of 
interests.
13.
(1)
Where any member of the Authority, or an officer of
the Authority, or a consultant, advisor or other person engaged by
the Authority, has any interest in, or material to, any matter which
falls to be considered by the Authority, he shall -
(a)
disclose to the Authority the nature of his interest at
the first meeting of the Authority after such interest is
acquired or in advance of any consideration of the
matter, whichever is the earlier, and in accordance
with directives issued from time to time by the
Authority;
(b)
neither influence nor seek to influence the processing
and the decision in relation to such matter;
(c)
take no part in any consideration of such matter; and
(d)
not attend nor participate in any meeting on such
matter.
(2)
Where a question arises as to whether or not a course of
conduct, if pursued by a person, would constitute failure by him to
comply with the requirements of sub-article (1), the question shall
be determined by the Authority and the decision and its motivation
shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting during which the
decision was taken and such person to be duly informed.
(3)
Where a disclosure is made to the Authority pursuant to
sub-article (1), particulars of the disclosure shall be recorded in the
minutes of the relative meeting.
(4)
Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-article (6) of article
6, where a person to whom sub-article (1) applies fails to make the
required disclosure, the Authority shall decide the appropriate
action to be taken which may include the removal from office or
termination of the contract of the person concerned.
Appointment and 
functions of 
officers of the 
Authority.
14.
The Authority shall appoint and employ, at such
remuneration and upon such terms and conditions as it may, in
accordance with article 12, determine, such officers of the
Authority as may from time to time be necessary for the due and
efficient discharge of the functions of the Authority.
Detailing of public 
officers for duty 
with the Authority.
15.
(1)
The Prime Minister may, upon request by the
Authority, from time to time, direct that any public officer shall be
detailed for duty with the Authority in such capacity and under
such conditions and with effect from such date as he may prescribe.
(2)
The period during which a direction as aforesaid shall apply
to any officer specified therein shall, unless the officer retires from
the public service or otherwise ceases to hold office at an earlier
date, or unless a different period is specified in such direction, end


--- PAGE 13 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
13
on the happening of any of the following events:
(a)
the acceptance by such officer of an offer of transfer to
the service of, and permanent employment with, the
Authority made in accordance with the provisions of
article 17; or
(b)
the revocation of such direction by the Prime Minister
or Minister:
Provided that in relation to a public officer detailed for duty
with the Authority with effect from such date as the Prime Minister may
in a direction as aforesaid establish, the detailing of such public officer
shall cease to have effect after one year from the effective date of such
direction, unless the direction is revoked earlier by the Prime Minister.
(3)
Where a direction as aforesaid is revoked by the Prime
Minister or Minister in relation to any officer, the Prime Minister
may, by further direction, detail such officer for duty with the
Authority in such capacity and with effect from such date as may be
specified in the Prime Minister’s direction, and the provisions of
sub-article (2) shall thereupon apply to the duration of such
detailing by any such further direction in relation to such officer.
Status of public 
officers detailed 
for duty with the 
Authority. 
16.
(1)
Where any public officer is detailed for duty with the
Authority under any of the provisions of article 15, such officer
shall, during the time in which such direction has effect in relation
to him, be under the administrative authority and control of the
Authority but he shall for all intents and purposes remain and be
considered and treated as a public officer.
(2)
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, an
officer detailed for duty as aforesaid -
(a)
shall not during the time in respect of which he is so
detailed -
(i)
be precluded from applying for a transfer to a
department of the Government in accordance
with the terms and conditions of service attached
to the Government appointment held by him at a
date on which he is so detailed; or
(ii)
be so employed that his remuneration and
conditions of service are less favourable than
those which are attached to the Government
appointment held by him at the date aforesaid or
which would have become attached to such
appointment, during the said period, had such
officer not been detailed for duty with the
Authority:
Provided that such terms and conditions shall
not be deemed to be less favourable because
they are not in all respects identical or superior
to those enjoyed by the officer concerned at the
date of such detailing, if in the opinion of the
Prime Minister, such terms and conditions, taken
as a whole, offer substantially equivalent or
greater benefits; and


--- PAGE 14 ---

14
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
Cap. 93.
Cap. 58.
(b)
shall be entitled to have his service with the Authority
considered as service with the Government for the
purposes of any pension, gratuity, or benefit under the
Pensions Ordinance and the Widows’ and Orphans’
Pensions Act and for the purpose of any other right or
privilege to which he would be entitled, and shall be
liable to any liability to which he would be liable, but
for the fact of his being detailed for duty with the
Authority:
Provided that in assessing the pensionable emoluments
of such officer for the purposes of any law relating to
government service pensions, no account shall be
taken of any allowances, bonuses or gratuities paid to
such officer by the Authority in excess of what he is
entitled to as a public officer.
(3)
Where an application is made as provided in sub-article
(2)(a)(i), the same consideration shall be given thereto as if the
applicant had not been detailed for service with the Authority.
(4)
The Authority shall pay to the Government such
contributions as may from time to time be determined by the
Minister responsible for finance in respect of the cost of pensions
and gratuities earned by an officer detailed for duty with the
Authority as aforesaid during the period in which he is so detailed.
Offer of permanent 
employment with 
the Authority to 
public officers 
detailed for duty 
with the Authority. 
17.
(1)
The Authority may, with the approval of the Prime
Minister or Minister, offer to any officer detailed for duty with the
Authority under any of the provisions of article 15, permanent
employment with it at a remuneration and on terms and conditions
not less favourable than those enjoyed by such officer at the date of
such offer, in either case the officer needs to have adequate
experience in the area of operation.
(2)
The terms and conditions comprised in any offer made as
aforesaid shall not be deemed to be less favourable merely because
they are not in all respects identical with or superior to those
enjoyed by the officer concerned on the date of such offer, if such
terms and conditions, taken as a whole, in the opinion of the Prime
Minister or Minister offer substantially equivalent or greater
benefits.
Cap. 93.
Cap. 58. 
(3)
Every officer who accepts permanent employment with the
Authority offered to him under the provisions of sub-article (1)
shall, for all purposes other than those of the Pensions Ordinance
and of the Widows’ and Orphans’ Pensions Act, and saving the
provisions of article 35, be deemed to have ceased to be in service
with the Government and to have entered into service with the
Authority on the date of his acceptance, and for the purposes of the
said Ordinance and of the said Act, so far as applicable to him,
service with the Authority shall be deemed to be service with the
Government within the meanings thereof respectively.
Cap. 58.
(4)
Every such officer as aforesaid who, immediately before
accepting permanent employment with the Authority, was entitled
to benefit under the Widows’ and Orphans’ Pensions Act, shall
continue to be so entitled to benefit thereunder to all intents as if


--- PAGE 15 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
15
his service with the Authority was service with the Government.
(5)
The Authority shall pay to the Government such
contributions as may from time to time be determined by the
Minister responsible for finance in respect of the cost of pensions
and gratuities earned by an officer who has accepted permanent
employment with the Authority as aforesaid during the period
commencing on the date of such officer’s acceptance.
Cap. 93.
(6)
For the purposes of the Pensions Ordinance , the
pensionable emoluments of such public officer on retirement shall
be deemed to be the pensionable emoluments payable to an officer
in Government service in a grade and at an incremental level
corresponding to the post occupied and incremental level on the
date on which the officer retires from the Authority.
(7)
(a) For the purposes of this article, posts and salary grades
with the Authority shall be classified in the most
nearly corresponding grades and incremental levels in
the service under the Government by reference to job
description, skills, responsibilities and other analogous
factors.
(b)
The classification referred to in paragraph (a) shall be
carried out by a board composed of a Chairman
appointed by the Minister responsible for finance and
two other members, one appointed by the Minister
responsible in general for personnel policies in the
public service and one appointed by the Authority. The
classification shall be subject to the final approval of
the Minister responsible for finance.
(c)
Such classification shall take place within three
months of any adjustment of salaries of officers in
Government service and, or of officers of the
Authority.
(d)
No post shall be classified in a grade higher than that
of a Grade 3 in the service of the Government or such
other grade that the Minister responsible for finance
may from time to time by notice in the Gazette
determine.
Cap. 93.
(e)
Without prejudice to article 113 of the Constitution, no
person may, following a classification as aforesaid, be
entitled to rights under the Pensions Ordinance less
favourable than those to which he would have been
entitled prior to such classification.
Engagement of 
consultants and 
advisers.
18.
The Authority may engage such consultants or advisers, as
it may consider necessary to assist it in the fulfilment of its
functions. For the purpose of this clause, all Environmental Voluntary
Organisations shall automatically be deemed eligible as consultants and
advisers that can assist the Authority in the fulfillment of its functions.
Authority to meet 
expenditure out of 
revenue.
19.
(1)
Without prejudice to the following provisions of this
article, the Authority Board shall so conduct the affairs of the
Authority that the expenditure required for the proper performance
of its functions shall, as far as practicable, be met out of its


--- PAGE 16 ---

16
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
revenue.
(2)
For the purposes of sub-article (1) the Authority shall levy
all fees, rates and other payments prescribed or deemed to be
prescribed by or under this Act or any other law providing for
matters falling under the powers and functions vested in the
Authority by or under this Act.
(3)
The Authority shall also be paid by Government out of the
Consolidated Fund such sums as Parliament may from time to time
authorise to be appropriated to meet the costs of specified works or
activities to be continued or otherwise carried out by the Authority.
(4)
Subject to such directives as the Minister may give from
time to time after consultation with the Minister responsible for
finance, any excess of revenue over expenditure shall be applied by
the Authority to the formation of reserve funds to be used for the
purposes of the Authority. Without prejudice to the generality of
the power of the Minister to give directives under this sub-article,
any directive given by the Minister as aforesaid may order the
transfer to the Government, or the application in such manner as
may be specified in the direction, of any part of the fees, rates and
other payments levied in accordance with sub-article (2).
(5)
Any funds of the Authority not immediately required to
meet expenditure may be invested by the Authority in such manner
as may from time to time be approved by the Minister.
Power to borrow or 
raise capital.
20.
(1)
For the purpose of carrying out any of its functions
under this Act, the Authority may, with the approval in writing of
the Minister given after consultation with the Minister responsible
for finance, borrow, including by way of overdraft or otherwise, or
raise money in such manner, from such person, body or authority,
and under such terms and conditions as the Minister, after
consultation as aforesaid, may in writing approve.
(2)
The Authority may also, from time to time, borrow, by way
of overdraft or otherwise, such sums as it may require for carrying
out its functions under this Act and this in accordance with the
procedure established under sub-article (1).
Advances from 
Government.
21.
The Minister responsible for finance may, after consultation
with the Minister, make advances to the Authority of such sums as
he may agree to be required by the Authority for carrying out any
of its functions under this Act, and may make such advances on
such terms and conditions as he may, after consultation as
aforesaid, deem appropriate. Any such advance may be made by the
Minister responsible for finance out of the Consolidated Fund, and
without further appropriation other than this Act, by warrant under
his hand authorising the Accountant General to make such advance.
Borrowing from 
Government.
22.
(1)
The Minister responsible for finance may, for any
requirements of the Authority of a capital nature, contract or raise
loans, or incur liabilities, for such periods and on such terms and
conditions as he may deem appropriate; and any sums due in
respect of or in connection with any such loan or liability shall be a
charge on the Consolidated Fund.


--- PAGE 17 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
17
(2)
Notice of any loans, liabilities or advances made or
incurred under the foregoing provisions of this article shall be
given to the House of Representatives as soon as practicable.
(3)
Pending the raising of any such loan as is mentioned in sub-
article (1), or for the purpose of providing the Authority with
working capital, the Minister responsible for finance may, by
warrant under his hand, and without further appropriation other
than this Act, authorise the Accountant General to make advances
to the Authority out of the Treasury Clearance Fund under such
terms as may be specified by the Minister upon the making thereof.
(4)
The proceeds of any loan raised for the purposes of making
advances to the Authority, and any other moneys to be advanced to
the Authority under this article, shall be paid into a fund specially
established for the purpose and which shall be known as the
"Authority Loan Fund".
(5)
Sums received by the Accountant General from the
Authority by way of repayment of advances made to the Authority
under sub-article (3) shall be paid into the Treasury Clearance Fund
and sums received by the Accountant General by way of interest on
such advances shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
Estimates of the 
Authority.
23.
(1)
The Authority shall cause to be prepared in every
financial year, and shall not later than four weeks before the end of
such year adopt, estimates of the income and expenditure of the
Authority for the following financial year:
Provided that the estimates for the first financial year of the
Authority shall be prepared and adopted within such time as the
Minister may by notice in writing to the Authority specify.
(2)
In the preparation of such estimates the Authority shall take
account of any funds and other monies that may be due to be paid
to it out of the Consolidated Fund during the relevant financial
year, whether by virtue of this Act or of an appropriation Act or of
any other law; and the Authority shall so prepare the said estimates
as to ensure that the total revenues of the Authority are at least
sufficient to meet all sums properly chargeable to its revenue
account, including, but without prejudice to the generality of that
expression, depreciation.
(3)
The estimates shall be made out in such form and shall
contain such information and such comparisons with previous years
as the Minister responsible for finance may direct.
(4)
A copy of the estimates shall, upon their adoption by the
Authority, be sent forthwith to the Minister and to the Minister
responsible for finance.
(5)
The Minister shall, at the earliest opportunity and not later
than six weeks after he has received a copy of the estimates from
the Authority, approve the same with or without amendment after
consultation with the Minister responsible for finance.
Expenditure to be 
according to 
approved 
estimates. 
24.
(1)
No expenditure shall be made or incurred by the
Authority unless provision thereof had been made in the estimates
approved as provided in article 23.


--- PAGE 18 ---

18
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(2)
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article (1) -
(a)
until the expiration of six months from the beginning
of a financial year, or until the approval of the
estimates for that year by the House, whichever is the
earlier date, the Authority may make or incur
expenditure for carrying on its functions under this Act
not exceeding in the aggregate one-half of the amount
approved for the preceding financial year;
(b)
expenditure approved in respect of a head or subhead
of the estimates may, with the approval of the Minister
given after consultation with the Minister responsible
for finance, be made or incurred in respect of another
head or subhead of the estimates;
(c)
if in respect of any financial year it is found that the
amount approved in the estimates is not sufficient or a
need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose not
provided for in the estimates, the Authority may adopt
supplementary estimates for approval by the Minister
and in any such case the provisions of this Act
applicable to the estimates shall as near as practicable
apply to the supplementary estimates;
(d)
this shall not apply to certain emergency actions that
may need to be taken by the authority, if no provision
for such action is available in the budget. 
Publication of 
approved 
estimates.
25.
The Minister shall, at the earliest opportunity and not later
than eight weeks after he has received a copy of the estimates and
supplementary estimates of the Authority, or if at any time during
that period the House of Representatives is not in session, within
eight weeks from the beginning of the next following session, cause
such estimates to be laid on the Table of the House of
Representatives, together with a motion that the House approve the
said estimates. One sitting day shall be allotted for the debate in the
House on such motion; and both the motion and the approval of the
estimates by the House may be with or without amendment to the
estimates.
Accounts and 
audit.
26.
(1)
The Authority shall cause to be kept proper accounts
and other records in respect of its operations, and shall cause to be
prepared a statement of accounts in respect of each financial year.
(2)
The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by an auditor
or auditors to be appointed by the Authority and approved by the
Minister:
 Provided that the Minister responsible for finance may,
after consultation with the Minister, require the books and accounts
of the Authority to be audited or examined by the Auditor General
who shall for the purpose have the power to carry out such physical
checking and other verifications as he may deem necessary.
(3)
The Authority shall, in accordance with regulations
published by the Minister, cause a copy of the statement of
accounts duly audited to be transmitted to the Minister and to the
Minister responsible for finance together with a copy of any report


--- PAGE 19 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
19
made by the auditors on that statement or on the accounts of the
Authority.
(4)
The Minister shall cause a copy of every such statement and
report to be laid before the House as soon as practicable.
Deposit of 
revenues and 
payments by the 
Authority.
27.
(1)
All monies accruing to the Authority shall be paid into
a bank or banks appointed as bankers of the Authority by a
resolution of the Authority. Such monies shall, as far as practicable,
be paid into any such bank from day to day, except such sum as the
Authority may authorise to be retained to meet petty disbursements
and immediate cash payments.
(2)
All payments out of the funds of the Authority, other than
petty disbursements not exceeding a sum fixed by the Authority,
shall be made by such officer or officers of the Authority as the
Authority shall appoint or designate for that purpose.
(3)
Cheques against and withdrawals from any bank account of
the Authority shall be signed by such officer of the Authority as
may be appointed or designated by the Authority for that purpose
and shall be countersigned by the Chairperson or such other
member or officer of the Authority as may be authorised by the
Authority for that purpose.
(4)
The Authority shall also make provision with respect to -
(a)
the manner in which, and the officer or officers by
whom, payments are to be authorised or approved;
(b)
the title of any account held with the bank or banks
into which the monies of the Authority are to be paid,
and the transfer of funds from one account to the
other;
(c)
the method to be adopted in making payments out of
funds of the Authority, and generally with respect to
any matter which is relevant to the proper keeping and
control of the accounts and books, and the control of
the finance, of the Authority.
Contracts of supply 
or works.
28.
The Authority shall not award or enter into any contract for
the supply of goods or materials or for the execution of works, or
for the rendering of services, to or for the benefit of the Authority,
except in accordance with regulations in force regulating the
procurement of all goods and services in the public sector.
Annual Report.
29.
The Authority shall, in accordance with regulations made
by the Minister, make and transmit to the Minister and to the
Minister responsible for finance a report dealing generally with the
activities of the Authority during that financial year and containing
such information relating to the proceedings and policy of the
Authority as either of the said Ministers may from time to time
require. The Minister shall cause a copy of every such report to be
laid on the Table of the House as part of the estimates prepared in
accordance with the provisions of article 25.
Exemption from 
tax.
30.
The Authority shall be exempt from any liability for the
payment of any tax on income or duty on documents for the time


--- PAGE 20 ---

20
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
being in force in Malta.
2. Committees, Boards and Funds
Standing 
Committee on the 
Environment and 
Development 
Planning.
31.
The Minister shall refer the following to the Standing
Committee on the Environment and Development Planning:
(a)
any plan referred to the House of Representatives in
terms of this Act; the Standing Committee on the
Environment and Development Planning shall also
recommend to the House whether the plan should be
approved, with or without amendments, or rejected;
(b)
the National Strategy for the Environment and the State
of the Environment Report;
(c)
any other report, plan or policy as the Minister may
deem necessary:
Provided that where the said Standing Committee fails to report
to the House within the stipulated period in the Development Planning
Act, the Minister for the Environment shall make a formal request to the
House to discuss the strategy, plan or policy.
The Environment 
Fund and other 
funds.
32.
(1)
The Authority shall set up a fund, hereinafter referred
to as the Environment Fund.
(2)
The Environment Fund shall be administered by the
Authority.
(3)
The Environment Fund shall be used to finance projects,
programs and schemes related to, and costs intended to achieve and
manage, the aims and objectives of this Act, studies, as well as
works which may be needed for that purpose or to remedy any harm
caused to the environment, as the Minister in consultation with the
Authority may prescribe:
Provided that, without prejudice to the aforesaid, the
Environment Fund shall not be used to finance other costs of the
Authority:
Provided further that the Authority may charge the
Environment Fund for any services rendered by it to the
Environment Fund.
(4)
There shall be paid into the Environment Fund:
(a)
any sums appropriated by Parliament for the purpose;
(b)
any donations or grants made to the Environment Fund
by individuals or institutions;
(c)
sums received by the Authority for the purpose of
being placed in the Environment Fund;
(d)
such other sums or monies as may from time to time be
provided by or under this or any other law or
regulations:
Provided that the Authority shall implement all relevant
safeguards to ensure that the implementation of this sub-article
does not result in any actual or perceived conflict of interests in the
performance of its regulatory functions, and does not otherwise


--- PAGE 21 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
21
tarnish its reputation or public trust. Such safeguards shall include,
inter alia and as deemed most relevant:
(a)
appropriate functional and operational separation;
(b)
internal administrative firewalling; and
(c)
rejection of donations or grants offered to it,
financially or in kind, which may introduce a likely or
foreseeable conflict of interests.
(5)
The Environment Fund shall keep a proper account of its
revenue and expenditure and the Authority shall, without prejudice
to the powers of the Auditor General and of the Minister
responsible for finance under any law, each year cause the accounts
of the Environment Fund to be audited by suitably qualified public
auditors and accountants appointed by it with the concurrence of
the Minister.
(6)
The Environment Fund shall every financial year deliver to
the Minister, through the Authority, a copy of its duly audited
balance sheet together with a report of its activities during the
previous financial year. The Minister shall lay a copy of the balance
sheet and of the report on the Table of the House within a month of
the receipt of the same from the Authority.
Cap. 123.
Cap. 364. 
(7)
The revenue of the Environment Fund shall not be subject
to tax under the Income Tax Act and the Environment Fund shall
not be liable to tax under the Duty on Documents and Transfers
Act.
(8)
The Minister after consulting the Authority may make
regulations prescribing the procedure to be followed by the
Authority and otherwise regulating the Environment Fund.
(9)
The Authority may set up other funds and prescribe what
shall be paid into such funds and how the said funds shall be
administered and used. The provisions of sub-articles (4), (5), (6),
(7) and (8) shall apply mutatis mutandis to such other funds.
The Registration 
Board.
33.* (1)
There shall be a Registration Board whose function
shall be to evaluate applications for registration in the Register of
Consultants eligible to carry out environmental assessments, audits,
monitoring and studies as required by the Authority.
(2)
The Board shall be composed of a minimum of three
members and a maximum of five members, appointed by the
Minister one of whom shall be appointed to chair the board.
(3)
The members of the Board shall be independent members
who are not involved in any way in the preparation of
environmental or other assessments falling within the jurisdiction
of the Board.
(4)
The Board shall seek the opinion of the Authority, which
shall make appropriate reference to applicable standards and
regulations regarding the quality of assessments audits, monitoring,
studies and associated environmental information required by the
Authority to fulfil its function, following which it will assess
*not yet in force.


--- PAGE 22 ---

22
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
applications for such registrations and approve those that meet the
requirements for registration. The Board shall give reasons for its
decisions.
(5)
The decision of the Board to grant or to refuse an
application for registration in the Register kept by the Authority
shall be notified in writing to the applicant without delay.
(6)
The Board may direct the Authority to update the Register
at such regular intervals as it may deem fit by the inclusion of other
disciplines in the Register, which disciplines might have in the
meantime evolved.
(7)
The decisions of the Board shall be final. An appeal shall
lie to the Tribunal only on the grounds that the Board has, in its
decision, wrongly applied the provisions of this Act or any
regulations issued thereunder, or the decision of the Board
constitutes an abuse of discretion or is manifestly unfair, and
without prejudice to the aforesaid, the discretion of the Board may
not, so long as it has been exercised properly, be queried by the
Tribunal. An appeal from a partial decision of the Board may only
be filed together with an appeal from the final decision of the
Board.
(8)
The decision of the Board shall be binding if it is supported
by the opinion of a majority of its members, and the dissenting
member or members, if any, may express his opinion separately;
and all decisions of the Board shall be delivered in public and shall
be published as soon as practicable after the sitting at which they
are given.
(9)
The Minister may, after consultation with the Board, make
regulations to give better effect to the provisions of this article and,
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, he may:
(a)
establish criteria that applicants are expected to meet
in order to qualify for registration;
(b)
establish the procedure to be followed by the Board;
(c)
prescribe a tariff of fees for registration with the
Board.
Powers of the 
Registration 
Board.
34.* (1)
The Registration Board may, out of its own motion, or
at the request of the Authority, cancel any certificate granted under
the provisions of article 33 or refuse any application for a renewal
of the registration, when the holder of that certificate:
(a)
is found guilty by a court of criminal jurisdiction of a
crime committed through fraud, corruption, false
declaration, imprudence, carelessness, unskillfulness
in an art or profession, or non-observance of
regulations; or
(b)
is found guilty by a court of criminal jurisdiction of
any offence under the provisions of this Act or of any
regulations made thereunder; or
(c)
has, in the opinion of the Authority and the Board,
*not yet in force.


--- PAGE 23 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
23
submitted sub-standard or deliberately misleading
work in an environmental assessment or other studies;
or
(d)
has participated in the preparation of an environmental
assessment in a consultant role when he was not
registered in the Register; or
(e)
was the recipient of a certificate issued under the
provisions of article 33 based on information which is
false or misleading; or
(f)
fails to pay the yearly renewal fee.
(2)
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article (1), the Board
may opt for a suspension, rather than cancellation of the certificate,
in the circumstances specified in sub-article (1)(d) and (f).
(3)
Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-article (1), if a
person participates in a consultant role in the preparation of an
environmental assessment without being registered in the Register,
he shall subsequently be barred from registering or participating in
any assessments in Malta for a period to be decided by the Board
which period shall in no case be less than three years.
3. Common Provisions
Members of the 
Authority, etc., to 
be deemed public 
officers for certain 
purposes. 
Cap. 9.
35.
(1)
For the purposes of the Criminal Code and of any
provision of a penal nature in any other law, the members of the
Authority and of any committee, board, or other body or office
established by this Act, and every officer thereof, shall be deemed
to be and be treated as a public officer.
(2)
The members and officers of the Authority in the
performance of their functions under this Act or under any other
law administered by the Authority, shall not be liable for any loss
or damage suffered by any person by reason of anything done or
omitted to be done in good faith in the course of the administration
of this Act or of any other law.
Consultations.
36.
The Authority, or any committee or Board, may consult
with any officer of the Authority or any other person or entity
whose advice is considered relevant to any matter under its
consideration. Such consultations shall be duly recorded.
Declaration of 
assets, code of 
conduct and 
publication of 
names. 
37.
(1)
Every member of the Authority Board, the Chief
Executive Officer and each Director of the Authority or any other
member of the Authority as prescribed by the Minister, shall submit a
declaration of assets in accordance with the procedures established for
this purpose by the Minister.
(2)
The Minister shall, in consultation with the Authority,
issue, publish and review a code about the conduct expected of the
members of the Authority and any other committee, board or other
body established by this Act, and of officers of the Authority, in
connection with the performance of the Authority’s functions.
(3)
The provisions of the code of conduct shall be taken into
account in deciding whether any such member or officer is unfit to
perform the duties assigned to him under this Act or whether his


--- PAGE 24 ---

24
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
term of office is to be renewed.
(4)
The names of all the members of the Authority, and of any
committee, board or other body established by this Act, and any
other change in such membership shall be published in the Gazette.
PART IV
Transfer of Officers and Assets to the Authority
Transfer of officers 
and assets to the 
Authority.
38.
(1)
The officers, property and undertakings owned by the
Malta Environment and Planning Authority and which are to be
transferred to or vested in the Authority shall be transferred to and
vested in the Authority in accordance with regulations prescribed
by the Minister.
(2)
The transfer and vesting in the Authority as aforesaid shall
extend to the whole of such property and undertakings and, without
prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid, shall include all plant,
equipment, apparatus, instruments, vehicles, buildings, structures,
installations, land, works, stocks and other property, movable and
immovable assets, powers, rights and privileges and all things
necessary or ancillary thereto which are held or enjoyed in
connection therewith or appertaining thereto, as well as all
obligations affecting or relating to any of the aforesaid property or
undertakings or other thing included therein as aforesaid.
Construction of 
laws, etc.
39.
Subject to other provisions of this Act, all laws, rules,
regulations, orders, judgments, decrees, awards, deeds, bonds,
contracts, agreements, instruments, documents, warrants and other
arrangements, subsisting immediately before the date of the coming
into force of this Part of this Act affecting or relating to any of the
properties or undertakings transferred to the Authority by or under
this Act and in which the Government or a government authority is
a party thereto or is named therein shall have full force and effect
against or in favour of the Authority, and shall be enforceable
freely and effectively, in such manner as if instead of the
Government or governmental authority the Authority has been
named therein or had been a party thereto in substitution of the
Government or governmental authority in question.
Transitory 
provisions.
40.
(1)
Anything relating to any of the properties or
undertakings or any right or liability transferred to the Authority by
or under this Act which has been commenced by or under the
authority of the Government or the Malta Environment and
Planning Authority before the date of the coming into force of this
Part of this Act may continue to be carried on and completed by or
as authorised by the Authority on or after such date.
(2)
The Minister may by order make such incidental,
consequential and supplemental provisions as he may deem
necessary or expedient for the purpose of determining, as
appropriate, the assets transferred to the Authority by this Act and
securing and giving full effect to the transfer of any property or
undertaking or any right or liability to the Authority by this Act and
make such orders as may be necessary to make any powers and
duties exercisable by the Government or the Malta Environment


--- PAGE 25 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
25
and Planning Authority in relation to any of the transferred
property or undertakings exercisable by or on behalf of the
Authority.
PART V
Environment Protection
1. Plans and Policies
Plans, policies and 
regulations. 
41.
Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the
protection and effective management of the environment shall be
regulated by plans, policies and regulations, which are prepared
and amended from time to time in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
Request by the 
Minister to the 
Authority to 
prepare a plan or 
policy.
42.
(1)
The Authority shall, either out of its own motion but
after consultation with the Minister, or if so requested by the
Minister, make a plan or a policy on any matter relating to the
environment.
(2)
The Authority may also, either out of its own motion but
after consultation with the Minister, or if so requested by the
Minister, review a plan or a policy which is already in force.
(3)
The Minister shall, upon making such a request in writing,
send to the Authority the reasons for making such a request
together with a statement of goals and objectives to be attained by
the plan or policy or a revision of such plan or policy.
(4)
The preparation and review of the National Strategy for the
Environment shall be regulated by the provisions of articles 45 to
47 whereas the preparation or review of any other plan or policy
shall be regulated by the provisions of article 51:
Provided that the Minister may, without prejudice to the
provisions of articles 45 to 47 and article 51, set out any additional
procedure that the Authority ought to follow, including the carrying
out of assessments, and may also carry out any assessments and, or
consultations, including public consultations, he may deem
necessary.
(5)
If the Authority, upon a request by the Minister in terms of
sub-article (1), informs the Minister, within thirty days of receipt of
such a request, that it is unable, for whatever reason, to prepare
such a plan or policy, the Minister shall instruct the Authority to
delegate such function in terms of article 9 with regard to that
particular plan or policy and in so doing it shall ensure that the
provisions of this Part are complied with.
Minister may 
request the 
preparation by any 
person of a plan, 
policy or revision 
thereof.
43.
(1)
Where the Authority is unable to prepare a plan or
policy or fails to delegate such function as is envisaged in article
42(5), the Minister shall request any person, including any
government entity other than the Authority, to prepare on his behalf
a plan or policy or a revision of such a plan or such policy.
(2)
The Minister shall consult the Authority on the terms of
reference which are to form the basis of the preparation of a plan or
a policy or a revision of such plan or policy by the said person. The


--- PAGE 26 ---

26
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
Minister shall then furnish the said person with the relative terms of
reference and shall also indicate to the said person the
documentation which shall be presented to the Minister when the
plan, policy or a revision of such plan or policy is drawn up. On
receipt of such documentation, the Minister shall forward a copy of
such documentation to the Authority.
(3)
The Minister shall also request the said person to comply
with the provisions of article 51. For the purposes of the said
paragraphs, the expression "the Authority" shall be construed as a
reference to the said person and such person shall revise, if
necessary, the plan, policy or a revision thereof after taking into
consideration the representations he may have received.
(4)
If the Authority agrees with such a plan, policy or revision
thereof, it shall adopt it for submission to the Minister for his
approval; and the provisions of article 51 shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply.
(5)
If the Authority does not agree with the said plan, policy or
revision of such plan or such policy, it shall draw up a position
statement indicating the changes to be made to the said plan, policy
or revision thereof and shall refer both the said plan, policy or
revision of such plan or such policy and its position statement to
the Minister; and the provisions of article 51 shall mutatis mutandis
apply.
(6)
The plan, policy or the revision of such plan or policy shall
only be prepared by or under the direction of an expert in the
environment having such qualifications as the Minister may
prescribe in consultation with the Authority.
Strategic 
Environment 
Assessment and 
other assessments.
44.
Without prejudice to his powers under the provisions of this
Act, the Minister may direct that the Authority or any department,
entity, corporation or authority established by law to subject any
plan, policy or strategy adopted or planned to be adopted by it to a
Strategic Environment Assessment or any other assessment, and
may by regulations prescribe and regulate the procedures and
methods to be adopted in such assessments.
2. The National Strategy for the Environment
The National 
Environment 
Strategy and its 
preparation and 
review.
45.* (1)
The Authority shall prepare the National Strategy for the
Environment. In preparing such document the Authority shall consult
with all the entities set up under this Act and those other entities,
whether public or otherwise including ministries, as the Authority may
deem proper.
(2)
The Minister shall review the said strategy as often as may
be necessary, and in any case not less than once every four years:
Provided that if the Authority is unable, for whatever
reason, to prepare the National Strategy or its review, shall inform
the Minister as soon as practicable and the Minister shall instruct
the Authority to delegate such function in terms of article 9 in so
doing it shall ensure that the provisions of this Part are complied
*not yet in force.


--- PAGE 27 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
27
with.
Provided further that the first Strategy Document shall be
drawn up within twenty four months from the coming into force of
this Act.
(3)
The National Strategy for the Environment is a strategic
governance document which sets the policy framework for the
preparation of plans, policies and programs issued under this Act or
under any other Act for the protection and sustainable management
of the environment, including land and sea resources.
(4)
In preparing or reviewing the National Strategy for the
Environment, the Minister shall have regard to:
(a)
the environmental policies and the State of the
Environment Report;
(b)
the current economic and financial policies;
(c)
the current social policies;
(d)
the policies of the Government;
(e)
the environmental issues and concerns of material
relevance to the strategy;
(f)
the resources likely to be available in all relevant
government entities for the implementation of the
strategy; and
(g) the European Union Environment Acquis and other
international environmental convention obligations to
which Malta is a party.
(5)
During the preparation or review of the National Strategy
for the Environment the Minister shall make known to the public
the matters intended for consideration and shall provide adequate
opportunities for individuals and organisations to make
representations.
Publication of the 
National Strategy 
for the 
Environment or 
its reviews.
46.* (1)
When the National Strategy for the Environment or a
review thereof has been completed, the Minister shall publish the
strategy together with a statement of the representations received
and the responses made to those representations.
(2)
Representations on the strategy are to be submitted to it
within a specified period of not less than six weeks.
Final consideration 
and approval of 
strategy or review.
47.* (1)
At the conclusion of the procedures set out in the
foregoing provisions, the National Strategy for the Environment
shall be considered by the Cabinet of Ministers together with the
Minister’s position statement and the representations made with
respect to the strategy or its review.
(2)
The Minister shall then cause the National Strategy for the
Environment, or a review thereof as originally prepared, or as
revised, together with the Minister’s position statement, to be laid
before the House together with a motion for a resolution that the
National Strategy for the Environment be approved by the House,
*not yet in force.


--- PAGE 28 ---

28
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
with such amendments, if any, as may be specified in the
resolution.
(3)
The National Strategy for the Environment, and any review
thereof as approved by the House shall have effect as from such
date as may be specified for that purpose by the Minister by order
in the Gazette; and for the purposes of this Act, other than those
provisions relative to the preparation, consideration and
presentation of the National Strategy for the Environment or its
review, the expression "National Strategy for the Environment" and
any reference to a review thereof means the National Strategy for
the Environment, and any review thereof, as approved by the House
of Representatives.
3. Subsidiary Plans and Policies
Subsidiary plans.
48.
(1)
A subsidiary plan is a plan that deals with a specific
environmental policy or matter setting out detailed specifications
for its implementation.
(2)
A subsidiary plan shall consist of a written statement
supported by such documents, maps and diagrams as may be
considered necessary.
(3)
Except as otherwise stated in the plan, a subsidiary plan
shall apply to all relevant areas of the environment and of the
National Strategy for the Environment, whether or not such areas
are also covered by another plan or policy.
Effect of 
subsidiary plans.
49.
(1)
A subsidiary plan is made by the Authority for any
matter or subject or any area that falls under the remit of the
Authority and where the Authority considers that it has to pay
particular attention in order to better manage it or where special
factors have to be taken into account which otherwise cannot be
taken.
(2)
Such a plan may include details on the implementation
tools and measures that are required to reach the objectives of the
plan, and may also include provisions intended for the enforcement
of such tools, in which case, such provisions shall be construed as
enforceable in the same manner as any provision of any regulation
issued under the Act.
Other policies or 
plans.
50.
(1)
Where the Authority considers that for the proper and
effective management and protection of the environment or for the
proper protection of land and sea it is necessary to prepare more
detailed policies, plans or guidance other than those already
contained in a plan or policy, the Authority may prepare and adopt
such policies, plans or guidance as it considers appropriate subject
to the provisions of this article.
(2)
Such policies or plans shall be in a form which the
Authority considers appropriate to the subject matter, and may be
supported by such documents, environmental or other assessments,
maps, diagrams, drawings and illustrations as may be considered
necessary by the Authority.
(3)
When the Authority adopts a policy or plan (be it a new


--- PAGE 29 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
29
policy or plan or a revision of an existing policy or plan), it shall
refer it to the Minister for his approval and the procedure
mentioned in article 51 shall mutatis mutandis apply.
Procedure for 
subsidiary plan and 
policies.
51.
In the preparation or review of a subsidiary plan or policy,
the following procedure shall be followed: 
Where the Authority prepares a subsidiary plan or policy or
review thereof as aforesaid, it shall seek the Minister’s approval in
terms of the following procedure:
(a)
during the preparation or review of a subsidiary plan
or policy, the Authority shall make known to the
public the matters it intends to take into consideration
and 
shall 
provide 
adequate 
opportunities 
for
individuals and organisations to make representations
to the Authority;
(b)
when the subsidiary plan or policy or a revision
thereof has been prepared, the Authority shall publish
the plan or policy together with a statement of the
representations it has received and the responses it has
made to those representations. The Authority shall
invite representations on the plan or policy to be
submitted to it within a specified period of not less
than six weeks
(c)
the Authority shall adopt the subsidiary plan or policy
after taking into consideration all the representations
submitted to it as aforesaid;
(d)
the Authority shall refer the subsidiary plan or policy
to the Minister. It shall also forward to the Minister: 
(i)
the statement of representations; 
(ii)
the responses and amendments it has made as a
result of those representations; 
(iii)
a precise indication of all other amendments it
has made to the plan or policy; and 
(iv)
all the documentation and studies relative to the
preparation of the subsidiary plan; 
(e)
the Authority shall also publish the plan or policy and
invite representations on the matters indicated in
paragraph (d)(iii) to be submitted within a specified
period of not less than six weeks; 
(f)
the Authority shall adopt the subsidiary plan or policy
after taking into consideration all the representations
submitted to it as aforesaid and shall refer the
subsidiary plan or policy to the Minister for his
approval. It shall also forward to the Minister: 
(i)
the statement of representations; and 
(ii)
the responses and amendments it has made as a
result of those representations;
(g)
where the Minister agrees with the subsidiary plan he
shall approve it as submitted by the Authority and the
Authority shall upon such approval publish the same


--- PAGE 30 ---

30
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
together 
with 
the 
statements, 
responses,
documentation and studies referred to in paragraphs
(d) and (f);
(h)
where the Minister does not agree with the subsidiary
plan as adopted by the Authority in accordance with
paragraph (f), he shall prepare a position statement
stating his proposed changes or his reactions to the
Authority’s subsidiary plan and shall refer back the
subsidiary plan to the Authority together with his
position statement;
(i)
where the Authority does not agree with the Minister
following the referral back to it of the subsidiary plan
by the Minister, it shall draw up a position statement
and shall refer it back to the Minister;
(j)
the Minister shall then issue a final position statement.
He shall forthwith communicate it to the Authority;
(k)
the Authority shall forthwith amend the subsidiary
plan in accordance with the Minister’s final position
statement and submit the same for the Minister’s final
approval;
(l) 
upon such approval by the Minister, the Authority
shall publish the subsidiary plan together with its own
position statements and those of the Minister and
together 
with 
the 
statements, 
responses,
documentation and studies referred to in the preceding
paragraphs;
(m) where the subsidiary plan or any part thereof extends
the scope of or is in conflict with the National Strategy
for the Environment, the Minister shall comply with
the provisions of articles 45 to 47 with regard to such
subsidiary plan or any part thereof, provided that those
parts of the subsidiary plan that do not extend the
scope of or are not in conflict with the National
Strategy for the Environment shall come into force on
the date of approval by the Minister.
Review of 
subsidiary plan or 
policies.
52.
(1)
Every subsidiary plan or policy shall be reviewed as
frequently as may be necessary or as may be made necessary by a
review of the National Strategy for the Environment.
(2)
Where as a result of such a review the Authority proposes
to alter a plan or policy in any significant respect, or where it is
proposed that a plan or policy be withdrawn, any such proposal
shall be subject to the same procedures and shall be treated as a
new plan or policy.
4. Regulations and Orders
Power to make 
regulations, etc., to 
include power to 
revoke, etc.
Cap. 249
53.
Without prejudice to the provisions of article 6 of the
Interpretation Act, any power conferred by this Act to make
regulations, rules, orders, lists, schedules and any other instrument
of like nature, includes the power from time to time to revoke,
replace, amend, alter or add to any such instrument as aforesaid.


--- PAGE 31 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
31
Power to make 
regulations.
54.
(1)
The Minister may, acting in accordance with the
provisions of article 55, make regulations for the better carrying
out of the provisions of this Act and may in particular by such
regulations appoint the Authority or any person or body to be the
designated authority for the purposes of any international
obligation to which Malta may be a party.
(2)
Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
article (1) such regulations may, in particular:
(a)
prescribe the charges and fees that may be levied by
the Authority for services rendered by it under this
Act, or in respect of any matter for which it is
considered that a fee should be payable;
(b)
provide for the procedure to be followed by the
Authority, the applicant and any other relevant parties
before and after the submission of an application for
authorisation under this Act, or otherwise involving
any assessment under this Act; as well as the
procedures for, inter alia, advertising, communication,
vetting 
and 
screening 
of, 
and 
consultations,
representations and decision-making on, the said
application or assessment, and the general conditions
under which the Authority may in relation to any
activity which may require an authorisation or
assessment under this Act require the giving of
financial or other guarantees or the provision of
assurance to:
(i)
prevent, deter, mitigate or remedy any damage to
the 
environment 
or 
deterioration 
of
environmental quality;
(ii)
make good for any damage that may be caused to
the environment; and
(iii)
secure adherence to any commitments made
toward 
environmental 
improvement 
or
environmental benefits;
(c)
provide for any aspect relating to the conditions that
may be imposed in relation to any authorisation under
this Act or otherwise involving any assessment under
this Act including where applicable any grant,
renewal, 
transfer, 
suspension, 
cancellation 
and
duration, the manner in which submissions and
applications are to be made, the content and form of
such applications and submissions and how they may
be granted, rejected, renewed or transferred, the fees
payable, and the manner in which renewals or transfers
thereof are to be indicated;
(d)
prescribe what type of information held by the
Authority or otherwise falling within the scope of this
Act shall be accessible to the public as well as to
establish the procedure concerning access thereto and
the relative fees to be paid to obtain copies of such
information;


--- PAGE 32 ---

32
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(e)
give effect to any international treaty or instrument,
including 
directives, 
regulations 
and 
decisions,
relating to any matter governed by this Act to which
Malta may from time to time be a party or subject and
to set up structures and make other provisions for the
implementation thereof;
(f)
establish, co-ordinate and enforce environment quality
control systems and make provisions for the carrying
out of assessments of environmental impacts and risks
of both new and existing establishments as well as to
provide for the effective prevention and remedying of
environmental damage;
(g)
provide for the collection, processing, comparison,
management and interpretation of data related to the
environment and to provide that such persons carrying
out such activities that may affect the environment as
may be prescribed give such information and data to
the Authority in a regular or other basis as may be
prescribed in order to enable the Authority to monitor
and safeguard the quality of the environment;
(h)
prescribe the techniques or the parameters in the
monitoring of the environment;
(i)
prescribe, in collaboration with the Civil Protection
Department, or any other relevant public entity, the
circumstances in which an environmental emergency
may be declared, and the effect that such a declaration
may have on any activity requiring an authorisation
under this Act;
(j)
set objectives, issue directives and establish codes of
practice, all in relation to the environment, to the
reduction, reuse, recovery, treatment, storage and
disposal of materials as may be prescribed, to all
human activity which affects the environment, and
such regulations may in particular:
(i)
formulate objectives laying down in quantitative
and qualitative terms, the goals to be achieved in
the effort to control the environment;
(ii)
give directives with regard to such uses of the
environment as may be prescribed;
(iii)
establish 
the 
maximum 
quantities 
or
concentrations of discharge or emission, or use
of such substances as may be prescribed during
works, undertakings or activities of any nature
and ensure the enforcement and monitoring of
these standards; and
(iv)
establish 
codes 
of 
practice 
determining
procedures, methods, limits of discharge and
emission of substances applicable to works and
activities as may be prescribed both with regard
to the time when such works and activities are
taking place as well as with regard to the time


--- PAGE 33 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
33
when the works and activities have been
completed;
(k)
in relation to pollution prevention, control and
environmental quality:
(i)
establish systems which ensure such prevention
and control;
(ii)
prescribe measures to control, prevent, manage,
reduce or remedy pollution and degradation of
the environment;
(iii)
control the keeping, management, trading in or
use of substances and other activities which may
cause or facilitate pollution and degradation of
the environment;
(iv)
set standards including maximum permitted
levels in quantitative or qualitative terms, of
discharge and emissions into the environment of
materials, substances and disturbances and with
regard to the use of any technology, equipment,
matter, substance, method or procedure in
relation thereto;
(v)
establish methodologies to be used in the
monitoring of discharges and emissions into the
environment and to regulate the use of
information gathered during such monitoring;
(vi)
prevent, control, reduce, mitigate, remedy or
otherwise manage situations which may lead to
environmental emergencies and to prevent,
control, reduce, mitigate, remedy or otherwise
manage any adverse effects on the environment
resulting therefrom;
(l)
in relation to waste management:
(i)
classify waste and prescribing rules in relation
thereto in accordance with the type and category
thereof;
(ii)
regulate 
the 
management, 
recycling 
and
disposal;
(iii)
establish quotas, in quantitative and qualitative
terms, of permitted generation of waste, as well
as otherwise provide for the prevention and
reduction of waste;
(iv)
provide for the registration, control and, or,
licensing of waste management operations;
(m) in relation to the protection of biodiversity and other
natural features:
(i)
provide 
for 
the 
monitoring, 
assessment,
management, 
conservation 
and 
protection
thereof;
(ii)
declare any species, ecosystem or feature to be
protected and establish rules for its control,
protection, management, reintroduction and or


--- PAGE 34 ---

34
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
its return into the natural environment;
(iii)
declare any species to be an invasive species and
establish rules for its assessment, monitoring,
control and, or, eradication, and other prevention
and management mechanisms to control the
introduction and spread of such species;
(iv)
regulate the taking, exploitation and other use of
specimens of fauna, flora and, or natural
features; and in particular prohibit and, or,
control 
possession, 
collection, 
exhibition,
transport, trade, propagation or captive breeding
of such specimens as may be prescribed;
(v)
provide for the conservation, protection and
management of protected sites and particular
habitats or categories thereof and other natural
features in order to safeguard biological
diversity;
(vi)
declare any areas or sites on land or in the
internal or territorial waters, or beyond such
waters where Malta may have jurisdiction for
the purpose of the protection and control of the
environment, to be protected areas and to
provide for their protection and to regulate their
management;
(vii)
control and regulate any activity that may
interfere with the conservation status of
biological diversity;
(viii)
regulate trade in and the transit, import or export
of specimens of flora, fauna and other natural
features as may be prescribed;
(ix)
declare 
prohibited 
means 
of 
capture,
exploitation and killing of species or specimens
and provide rules for their monitoring and
control;
(x)
regulate access to genetic resources and their
benefit-sharing;
(xi)
provide 
measures 
for 
the 
conservation,
protection, management and regulation of
geological, 
geomorphological, 
hydrological,
edaphic and other features and areas containing
them;
(xii)
provide 
measures 
for 
the 
protection,
management and conservation of landscapes,
landscape features and landscape diversity;
(xiii)
provide 
measures 
for 
the 
prevention,
management and control of desertification, land
degradation and damage to or deterioration of
natural features;
(n)
control, 
manage 
and 
regulate 
the 
transport,
introduction of, use (including contained use), release
or placing on the market or in the environment of


--- PAGE 35 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
35
genetically modified organisms;
(o)
in relation to environmental assessments, audits and
monitoring:
(i)
provide for the carrying out of environmental
assessments, screenings, audits and monitoring,
for the review of ancillary submissions, reports
and documentation, and for the screening and
evaluation of any activities or development that
may affect the environment;
(ii)
regulate the procedures to be followed, and
require any person to undertake or commission
and to submit to the Authority any studies,
technical investigations, assessments, audits,
monitoring, reports or documentation as may be
deemed appropriate; and
(iii)
provide for the formulation of plans and
measures to prevent, deter, reduce, mitigate,
offset or remedy any adverse environmental
effects and risks;
(p)
in relation to the Authority’s functions, including
monitoring, compliance and enforcement:
(i)
after consultation with the Authority, make
regulations to give better effect to the provisions
of article 75(1)(a);
(ii)
authorise 
and 
regulate 
clamping, 
towing,
removal, impounding, confiscation, seizure and
storage by the Authority of any object used for
or in connection with anything contrary to the
provisions of this Act or any regulation made
thereunder;
(iii)
exclude the Authority from any liability, other
than liability for gross negligence, incurred in
connection with the execution of its duties under
the said regulations;
(iv)
provide for the disposal of objects without
liability, when the said objects are not claimed
by their owners within such time as may be
prescribed;
(v)
establish fees payable to the Authority for the
removal of clamps, for towing, for the storage of
objects and for the auction or other form of
disposal of such objects;
(vi)
establish the circumstances where objects can be
confiscated and establish the relative procedure
for their confiscation and disposal;
(vii)
order remediation of site or situation to original
state;
(viii)
 establish offences and the relative punishments
in relation to matters referred to in sub-
paragraphs (i) to (vii), which punishments shall
not exceed a maximum fine (multa) of two


--- PAGE 36 ---

36
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
hundred and fifty thousand euro (€250,000):
Cap. 9.
Cap. 446.
Provided that article 21 of the Criminal Code
and the provisions of the Probation Act shall not
apply to any offence established under this sub-
paragraph;
(q)
amend, substitute, add to or otherwise alter anything
contained in the Schedule;
(r)
provide for any other purpose for which regulations
are authorized or required to be made otherwise than
by the Authority;
(s)
prescribe the form of any notice, order or other
document authorised or required by this Act to be
made, submitted, served or given;
(t)
regulate how any notice or communication to or from
the Authority which in terms of this Act shall be in
writing may be made or submitted in electronic form;
(u)
provide that any person who acts in contravention of
any regulation under this Act shall be guilty of an
offence against this article, and establishing such
penalty, being a penalty not greater than a fine (multa)
of two hundred and fifty thousand euro (€250,000) or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or
both such fine and imprisonment, to which any person
so guilty may be liable:
Provided that such regulations may provide that a
person, who having been sentenced for an offence
against the same regulation by a judgement which has
become absolute, commits a further offence in
contravention of the same regulation within such time
as may be prescribed, shall be liable to pay a higher
fine (multa), not exceeding double the fine (multa)
which would otherwise have been inflicted, and for the
purpose of this proviso the maximum fine that may be
established by such regulations shall be five hundred
thousand euro (€500,000):
Provided further that such fine shall in all cases be due
to the Authority as a civil debt, and that where the
person guilty of the offence is a director, secretary or
manager of a body corporate for the economic benefit
of whom the offence was committed, such body
corporate shall be liable in solidum with the offender
for the payment of the said civil debt;
(v)
introduce measures relative to the liability to be
incurred by any individual who shall, in any manner be
deemed responsible for any action that may cause
environmental damage. Such regulations may also
include measures relating to the prevention and
remedying of such environmental damage;
(w) provide for the making of any deposit or the giving of
any guarantee to ensure the performance of any
obligation by any person as imposed as a condition of


--- PAGE 37 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
37
any permit, authorisation or licence under this Act;
(x)
prescribe the practices to be adopted in regard to
safety, and the protection of the environment in
relation to any matter regulated by this Act, including
any norms in relation to the liability of any person who
causes damage to the environment as a result of any
activities regulated by or under this Act undertaken by
that person;
(y)
make provisions regarding a contingency plan in the
event of any crisis relating to any matter regulated by
this Act;
(z)
provide for administrative infringements and fines,
including out of court settlement arrangements;
(aa) provide for economic instruments and schemes to
promote positive environmental behaviour;
(bb) make provisions regarding cooperation with other
authorities and the relationship between the Authority
and other public authorities including consultations,
provision of information and any other matter of
mutual interest;
(cc) provide for prescribing anything which may be or is
required to be prescribed by this Act.
(3)
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Act or of any
other law, the Authority reserves the right to publish certain
Schedules annexed to regulations made under this Act in the
Maltese language only, the English language only or both.
Procedure for 
making of 
regulations.
55.
(1)
Regulations under this Act shall be made by the
Minister after consultation with the Authority and, except for
regulations under article 54(2)(a), (b) and (u) and in the cases
referred to in sub-article (2) hereof, shall not be made unless a draft
of the said regulations has been issued for public consultation
thereby allowing any person a period of at least four weeks to make
representations to the Minister or to the Authority or to both stating
how in his opinion the proposed regulations could be improved to
reach their ultimate aim.
(2)
The provisions of sub-article (1) with regard to the
publication of a draft of the regulations for public consultation
shall not apply in respect to any regulations, which the Minister
declares to be urgent, or when a form of public consultation was
carried out before the date of coming into force of this Act.
(3)
 Any person may, in the circumstances referred to in sub-
article (1) in respect of draft regulations, not later than one month
after the promulgation of any regulations made in accordance with
sub-article (2) make submissions to the Minister and, or to the
Authority stating why and how the regulations should be revoked
or amended.
(4)
The Authority shall consider any representations made to it
under sub-articles (1) and (3) and shall report thereon, after hearing
such persons or taking such expert advice as it considers expedient,


--- PAGE 38 ---

38
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
to the Minister together with any other views it may have on the
draft published under sub-article (1) or the regulations made under
sub-article (2), and the Minister may, upon receipt of the report by
the Authority and any representations received by him, proceed to
revise the draft regulations and to promulgate such regulations in
accordance with such revision, or to amend any regulations already
promulgated; provided that where the Authority has not after the
lapse of four weeks after the end of the period for representation
referred to in sub-article (1) has elapsed, not made the report or has
not given its views to the Minister, the Minister may proceed to
promulgate the regulations contained in the draft with or without
changes as he may deem expedient, without prejudice to the
possibility of making any changes upon the receipt of such report
and views when made.
(5)
When the Minister makes regulations concerning the
procedure before the Authority or any board or other body
established under this Act, he shall also consult the Authority or
such board or body:
Provided that regulations concerning the procedure before
the Court of Appeal and appeals before it under this Act shall be
made by the Minister responsible for Justice in concurrence with
the Minister:
Provided 
further 
that 
regulations 
concerning 
the
establishment or variation of any fee shall be made by the Minister
with the concurrence of the Minister responsible for finance.
Orders.
56.
(1)
Without prejudice to any other provisions of this Act,
the Authority may make orders regulating activities which may
otherwise require the submission of an application prior to their
carrying out, including any notification thereof, or any aspect
thereof, in such circumstances and under such conditions as may be
specified in the order, being activities within the scope of, and not
in conflict with any plan or policy approved under this Act.
(2)
An order shall be published in the Gazette and shall have
effect from the date specified or indicated therein. The activity or
any aspect thereof regulated by such an order shall be called
"exempt activity" and an order regulating activity shall be called
"activity order".
(3)
The order may enable the Authority to prohibit the
commencement of an activity, or require the discontinuance of an
activity that has been carried out in breach of the provisions of this
Act and in contravention of any order or provision aforesaid, and
for applying any of the provisions of this Act with respect to
enforcement, subject to such adaptations and modifications as may
be specified in the order, or otherwise provide for the enforcement
of the order and of any notices issued thereunder.
(4)
The Authority shall periodically review the orders.
(5)
An order may regulate:
(a)
 an activity described as permitted in an order which
does not require that written notification of such
activity be given to the Authority;


--- PAGE 39 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
39
(b)
an activity described as permitted in an order provided
that written notification of such activity is to be given
to the Authority;
(c)
an activity described as permitted in an order provided
that written notification of such activity is to be given
to the Authority and the Authority has endorsed such
activity as being permitted:
Provided that the Authority shall have the right to:
(i)
reject 
any 
such 
notification 
given 
under
paragraphs (b) and (c), inter alia on grounds of
non-compliance with any provisions of the order
or of this Act, or in the event of any incorrect,
incomplete or misleading content, or other
broadly similar material consideration relating
to the wider case context; and
(ii)
where its endorsement is required, to refuse,
partially endorse or conditionally endorse the
activity, as appropriate.
(6)
No activity in terms of an order may be carried out on a site
if on the said site an activity has been carried out in breach of the
provisions of this Act, unless that activity is one which the
Authority may prescribe and which is covered by an order as
mentioned in sub-article (5).
Access to 
information.
57.
(1)
The Minister shall, in consultation with the Authority,
by regulations under this article provide that the Authority, members
of the public or such categories of persons as may be prescribed
shall be entitled to request from such Government departments,
authorities, public corporations or other persons as may be
prescribed such information and registers, in their entirety or in part
that they may have in their possession and relating to the
environment and, or required to ensure the Authority’s effective
implementation of its functions relating to environmental protection.
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such
regulations may prescribe:
(a)
the nature of the information that may be requested;
(b)
the circumstances in which such information may be
requested;
(c)
the circumstances in which such information may be
withheld by the requested entity and the publication of
the reasons for which such information is withheld;
(d)
the fees that may be charged in respect of any such
information; and
(e)
the time within which such information is to be
supplied.
(2)
Without prejudice to the generality of sub-article (1), the
Authority shall keep and make available for public inspection at
such reasonable times as it may determine, a register or registers:
(a)
of all applications for an authorisation received by it
containing the name of the applicant and details of the


--- PAGE 40 ---

40
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
proposal including documents and detailed plans;
(b)
of all decisions, including documents and detailed
plans, made on such applications; and
(c)
of all reports and assessments compiled in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, including any
Environmental Impact Assessment reports.
(3)
The State of the Environment Report shall be prepared by
the Authority and shall be passed on to the Commissioner for
Environment and Planning within the Office of the Ombusdman.
The Commissioner for Environment and Planning within the Office
of the Ombudsman shall have the right to ask the Environment and
Resources Authority and other authorities and entities to furnish his
office with any information that he requires in order to analyse the
report and to compile his opinion on such a report. The
Commissioner shall deliver the report together with his opinion to
the Speaker of the House within eight weeks from when the said
report was passed on to him and within a month from the tabling of
the report there shall be a dedicated sitting during which the report
is discussed.
PART VI
1. Requirement of Authorisations
Authorisations.
58.
(1)
Save as may otherwise be prescribed, no person shall
carry out any activity or operation, or be engaged in such activity
or operation, relating to or affecting the environment, unless such
person is in possession of an authorisation from the Authority
under this Act.
(2)
The activities and operations referred to in sub-article (1)
include, amongst others, the activities and operations listed in the
Schedule.
(3)
An authorisation granted to a person under this Act shall
not relieve such a person from the requirement at law to apply for
any other authorisation however so described, or from any other
obligation arising under any other law, or any obligation arising
from a condition emanating from an authorisation.
Application for 
authorisation.
59.
(1)
Any person, including a department of government or
a body corporate established by law, wishing to carry out any
activity referred to in article 58, not being an activity for which an
authorisation is given in an order and to be carried out in
accordance with the provisions thereof, shall apply to the Authority
for such authorisation, in such manner, on such form and giving
such information including environmental assessments and studies,
as the Authority may prescribe.
(2)
Any person may also submit a written request to the
Authority for a determination as to whether a proposal requires an
authorisation, environmental assessment or other relevant
submission.
Determination of 
authorisations.
60.
(1)
Any application or authorisation shall not be processed
or granted unless the applicant or his predecessor in title would


--- PAGE 41 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
41
have paid such fines, or civil debts to the Authority, or made such
other payments as may be due on the site or operation subject to the
application.
(2)
In its determination upon an application the Authority shall
apply such plans, policies and regulations issued under this Act as
it may deem relevant and appropriate.
(3)
In its determination upon an application the Authority shall
also have regard to any other material consideration which the
Authority may deem relevant.
(4)
The Authority shall have power to grant, partially grant, or
to refuse an authorisation, and in granting or partially granting such
an authorisation the Authority shall be entitled to impose such
terms, conditions, limitations and approved specifications which it
may deem appropriate:
Provided that upon a refusal, the Authority shall give
specific reasons for such refusal.
(5)
The Authority shall have the power to carry out inspections,
in connection with the permit application process or any ancillary
assessment or monitoring, for all authorisation types, including
inspections preceding submission, during the processing of
applications and after the decision-taking.
(6)
An authorisation shall be granted for a limited period
provided that the Authority may, on the application of the person
holding the authorisation, extend the said authorisation to such
further period or periods as it may consider reasonable.
(7)
In granting or partially granting an authorisation, the
Authority may require the activity to be completed within a
specified period of time as it may establish provided that the
Authority shall state the reasons justifying such requirement.
Decisions to be 
taken without 
delay.
61.
(1)
Decisions on applications shall be taken without delay.
(2)
The Minister may, after consultation with the Authority,
make regulations to give better effect to the provisions of this
article and, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, he
may:
(a)
establish the procedures to be used by the Authority
and the applicant in the submission, processing and
determination of applications;
(b)
establish the procedures to be used by an applicant
prior to the submission of an application;
(c)
establish minimum or maximum time limits or both
within 
which 
submissions, 
consultations 
and
representations have to be made and decisions have to
be taken and communicated as relevant.
Reconsideration.
62.
Any person holding an existing authorisation has the right
to request a modification to such authorisation to include further
operations, or changes in operational parameters as may be
required. Such requests shall be considered and processed as a new
application, not in any way conditioned by previous authorisations


--- PAGE 42 ---

42
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
issued by the Authority.
Appeals.
63.
Any aggrieved party may appeal from any decision of the
Authority to the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the
Environment and Planning Review Tribunal Act and any
regulations made thereunder.
Obligations.
64.
(1)
An environment obligation may be entered into in
those cases where the Authority, in connection with a grant of an
authorisation, seeks to impose on the applicant an obligation:
(a)
to carry out an activity benefiting the environment in
line with the objectives of this Act; or
(b)
to make some payment, financial or in kind, toward an
environmental purpose, or confer some extraneous
right or benefit to the environment, as the Authority
considers it to be more appropriate in the public
interest and in line with the objectives of this Act. The
Authority shall seek to obtain these benefits or gains
by means of conditions attached to a grant of the
authorisation or by means of an environment
obligation entered into by a public deed made by the
applicant for the authorisation with the Authority.
(2)
Any person may, by agreement with the Authority, enter
into an environment obligation, which may include:
(a)
mutually agreed terms in relation to the access of
genetic resources and benefit-sharing;
(b)
restricting the use of that land or operation in any
specified way;
(c)
requiring specified operations or activities to be
carried out, in, on, under or over that land or area;
(d)
requiring that land or area to be used in any specified
way; or
(e)
requiring a sum or sums to be paid to the Authority on
a specified date or dates or periodically.
(3)
The Minister may, in consultation with the Authority, make
regulations for giving better effect to the provisions of this article
and may, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing:
(a)
prescribe the procedure how an environmental
obligation may be entered into, enforced, modified and
discharged; and
(b)
establish any restrictions, conditions or the payment of
any sums of money which may be imposed in such
environment obligations.
(4)
The imposition of, or agreement to enter into, an
environmental obligation shall:
(a)
not constitute an entitlement to an authorisation,
licence or permit which would otherwise, considering
the merits of the case, not be granted or would only be
partly granted; and


--- PAGE 43 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
43
(b)
in the case of the granting of an authorisation, licence
or permit, be additional and without prejudice to the
imposition of any relevant conditions, limitations and
approved specifications.
2. Revocation or modification of authorisations
and Discontinuance or removal orders
Revocation and 
modification.
65.
(1)
The Authority may -
(a)
in the cases of fraud; or
(b)
where public safety or significant environmental
damage or risk is concerned; or
(c)
where there is an error on the face of the record; or
(d)
where there is a breach of a material condition
contained in an authorisation,
by a decision revoke or modify any authorisation granted under this
Act, including any clearance issued by the Authority under an
Order, stating in such decision its reasons for so doing; and, prior to
deciding to revoke or modify an authorisation in terms of this sub-
article, the Authority shall inform the person who will be affected
by its decision of the date and time of its meeting where the
Authority shall also hear the said person’s submissions if the latter
opts to attend, and any other person’s submissions.
(2)
For the purposes of sub-article (1):
"fraud" means the submission to the Authority of any
information or declaration on the basis of which the Authority has
approved an authorisation, where such information or declaration is
false, misleading or incorrect, irrespective of whether such deceit is
the result of a wilful or negligent act:
Provided that the Authority shall not revoke or modify an
authorisation on the basis of fraud as long as:
(a)
the fraudulent information did not have a material
bearing on the issuing of the authorisation; and
(b)
the Authority’s authorisation does not confer any
undue or fraudulent benefit to the applicant under any
other law or regulation, or potentially implicate the
Authority in any breach of such law or regulation;
"error on the face of the record" means an error on the face of a
record which offends against the law; and
"material condition" means any condition which is of specific
relevance to the activity covered by the authorisation.
(3)
The applicant shall, if the decision is taken by the
Authority, have a right to appeal the Authority’s decision within
thirty days from the date of service of a revocation decision or a
modification decision.
(4)
No compensation shall be payable by the Authority when it
acts under the provisions of sub-article (1) where the reason for the
revocation or a modification of an authorisation is based on fraud,
or error of law on the face of the record, or breach of a material


--- PAGE 44 ---

44
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
condition contained in an authorisation.
Reasons for 
revocation.
66.
(1)
Where the sole reason for revocation or modification
of an authorisation is public safety and, or significant
environmental damage, the following rules shall apply:
(a)
any activity that may be necessary for compliance with
the order shall be carried out by, or at the expense of,
the Authority;
(b)
if on a claim made to the Authority within twelve
months of the date of the revocation decision or the
modification decision, it is shown that any such
interested person has incurred expenditure that is
rendered useless by the revocation or modification, or
has otherwise sustained loss or damage that is directly
attributable to the revocation or modification, the
Authority shall, subject to paragraph (c), pay to that
person compensation in respect of that expenditure,
loss or damage;
(c)
no compensation shall be payable under this article:
(i)
in respect of loss or damage consisting of the
depreciation in value by virtue of the revocation
or modification; or
(ii)
in respect of any work carried out before the
grant of the authorisation that is revoked or
modified, or in respect of any other loss or
damage arising out of anything done or omitted
to be done before the grant of that authorisation,
or in respect of any works that are not in
accordance with the authorised specifications or
in breach of the terms, conditions and limitations
attached to the authorisation;
Cap. 88.
(d)
where compensation is payable under this article in
respect of expenditure incurred in carrying out any
work on land, if the competent authority under the
Land 
Acquisition 
(Public 
Purposes) 
Ordinance
acquires any interest in that land, any compensation
payable in respect of the acquisition of that interest
shall be reduced by an amount equal to the value of the
works in respect of which compensation is payable
under this article.
3. Charges and contributions
Charges and 
contributions.
67.
(1)
The Authority shall have power to levy a charge in
respect of any authorisation to carry out an activity, or
environmental assessments, environmental auditing or
environmental monitoring, to be known as the processing fee,
including any application therefor, in accordance with a schedule of
charges established by it with the concurrence of the Minister and
of the Minister responsible for finance, taking account of the nature
of the activity, the timing of the activity, of the conditions attaching
to the authorisation and of any other relevant consideration.
(2)
The Authority shall have power to levy a charge in respect


--- PAGE 45 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
45
of any other application for an authorisation made to it.
(3)
The schedule of charges and the rates of contributions
established under this article, as from time to time in force, shall be
published as regulations and shall have effect as so published.
Payment of fees 
and contributions.
68.
No authorisation shall be granted, and no activity
authorised by an order shall be carried out, unless and until any fee
or contribution payable under article 67 has been paid to and
received by the Authority; and any activity carried out without such
payment having been made and received shall be deemed to be an
activity carried out without the permission of the Authority.
4. Protection and Conservation
Conservation 
orders.
69.
(1)
The Authority shall prepare, and from time to time
review, a list of protected areas, habitats and species which are to be
protected for conservation and may in respect of all or any one or more
of the protected areas, habitats or species make protection and
conservation orders to regulate their protection, conservation and
management. Such orders shall be published in the Gazette and on
the Authority’s website.
(2)
Any additions or amendments to such orders thereto, shall be
published by the Authority in the Government Gazette and on the
Authority’s website. The Authority shall set up a mechanism to
notify any one of the owners of any property subject of a
conservation order of the fact of its inclusion in the list and of any
conservation order made with respect to it.
(3)
The carrying out of any activity and/or works in any
protected area may be prohibited or restricted as provided in
relevant regulations or in a conservation order.
(4)
Subject to the provisions of this article, further detailed
procedures regulating the application of this article shall be
established in regulations issued under this Act.
(5)
In respect of any site in a protected area, the Authority shall
also have power to require the owner, by notice in writing, to
undertake such works or actions generally, or as may be specified
in the notice, as may be necessary to ensure that no further
deterioration occurs. In default, the Authority may give a further
notice to the owner to carry out and complete the works or actions
within a specified time, and if the owner is still in default it may
itself carry out, or cause to be carried out, the necessary works or
actions and recover the cost thereof from the owner.
(6)
An owner of a site in a protected area has a right to request
the reconsideration of any protection of his land. Such request shall
be entered in writing with the Authority within thirty days of
notification or publication in the Gazette, whichever is the later, of
the protection and the Authority shall decide within three months of
receipt by it of the request for reconsideration.
(7)
The Minister’s endorsement shall be sought when the
Authority decides to remove or downgrades the protection afforded
to a protected area, and no such removal of protection or
downgrading shall be valid before it is endorsed by the Minister.


--- PAGE 46 ---

46
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(8)
Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the
Authority under this article may appeal to the Tribunal for a
revocation or modification of such a decision in accordance with
the procedure established under article 63.
(9)
An appeal to the Tribunal from the protection of an area or
the issue of a protection or conservation order shall not stay the
execution of such an order.
(10) If a site or area which is not protected under the provisions
of this Act or any regulations made thereunder, but which the
Authority believes could have an importance or value sufficient to
have it protected, is at risk of being damaged or destroyed, the
Authority may make an emergency conservation order and take
such further steps for the protection of such site or area as it may
deem necessary:
Provided that in case of urgency the Chairperson of the
Authority may make an emergency conservation order without the
need of consulting the other members of the Authority.
(11) An emergency conservation order shall be published in the
Gazette and shall have effect immediately on its publication.
(12) An emergency conservation order shall, for a period of six
months from its publication in the Gazette, have the same effect as
the inclusion of the area to which it refers in the list of protected
areas. It shall cease to have any effect on the expiration of the
period aforesaid, provided that the Authority shall within such
period undertake any further studies or investigations as it deems
necessary and thereupon decide to revoke or amend the order or
replace it with a more definitive protection or conservation order in
line with sub-article (1). Where such studies or investigations and
decision-making cannot be satisfactorily completed within the
aforesaid six-month period, the Authority may renew the
emergency conservation order for further periods as it deems
reasonable or indispensable, justifying its decision.
(13) An appeal to the Tribunal from an emergency conservation
order, or from an extension of time in line with sub-article (12),
shall not stay the execution of such order.
Liability for 
environmental 
damage.
70.
The Minister may, from time to time, by means of
regulations introduce measures relative to the liability to be
incurred by any individual who is, in any manner deemed
responsible for any action that may cause environmental damage,
whether in relation to a protected area, or in general. Such
regulations may also include measures relating to the prevention
and remedying of such environmental damage.
5. Guardianship
Guardianship and 
guardianship deed.
Added by:
XXIII.2018.3
70A.
(1)
The Minister may, with the prior approval in writing
of the Minister responsible for lands, enter by public deed, into a
guardianship contract with a local council or with a non-governmental
organisation whereby the custody and administration of immovable
property is passed over to the local council or non-governmental


--- PAGE 47 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
47
organisation, as the case may be, so that it may be used to secure an
environmental objective such as those set in article 4, and in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and of such regulations as may be
prescribed and with such conditions not inconsistent therewith as may
be included in the deed. The guardianship deed shall state the term for
which it is entered following careful consideration of the feasibility and
scale of undertaking of each proposal.
(2)
The Minister shall, however, within four weeks after its
publication or if the House is not then in session, within four weeks of
the date when the House next meets, lay a copy of the guardianship deed
on the Table of the House, and the guardianship deed shall be subject to
the condition that if on a motion tabled not later than twenty eight days
after the laying on the Table of the House of the copy of the
guardianship deed, the House resolves that the guardianship deed shall
be rescinded, the deed shall be automatically rescinded upon the passage
of the resolution.
(3)
Before entering a guardianship deed, the Minister shall seek
the views of the Authority as to the conditions to be included in the
guardianship deed; such conditions shall in particular address the
following matters:
(a)
the measures that are to be taken to attain the
environmental objective for which the guardianship agreement is
intended;
(b)
the organisational, operational and financial
arrangements in connection therewith, and the organisational,
operational and financial resources to be dedicated therefor.
(4)
A guardianship deed shall not prejudice any powers of any
public authority under this Act with regard to the immovable property
subject to the guardianship deed.
(5)
The property subject to the guardianship deed shall remain
the property of the Government.
(6)
The Minister after consulting the Authority may at any time
by Order in the Gazette rescind a guardianship deed if any conditions
stipulated therein or the provisions of this Act or of any regulations
made thereunder are not observed by the other party.
(7)
Not later than six weeks after each anniversary of a
guardianship deed the party in whose custody the immovable property is
placed shall transmit to the Minister and the Authority a report of its
activities in relation to the immovable property and on the way it has
executed the guardianship deed during the previous year. A copy of such
report shall be laid on the Table of the House by the Minister.
(8)
The Minister may make regulations generally prescribing rules


--- PAGE 48 ---

48
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
in relation to guardianship.
PART VII
Powers of the Authority, Monitoring, Compliance Action
and Enforcement of Control
1. Right of Entry, Inspections and Monitoring
Right of entry.
71.
(1)
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, for
the purposes of carrying out their functions under this Act, the
Board of the Authority, and such officer or committee or any other
person as may be authorised by the Authority for this purpose, and
if so required by the Authority with the assistance of the Police
Force, may enter any premises, public or private, vehicle, vessel or
any other place, for the purposes of:
(a)
the making of investigations, inspections, surveys,
tests or measurements, or lifting of samples;
(b)
ascertaining that nothing contrary to the provisions of
this Act, to the regulations made thereunder or to any
term, condition, limitation or specification attached to
any authorisation issued under this Act is taking or has
taken place, and taking any action accordingly;
(c)
ascertaining or reproducing such data or information
as the Authority may require;
(d)
making plans of any premises, vehicle or vessel and
taking photographs of the same after entry or boarding
in accordance with this article; or
(e)
doing anything that is ancillary or consequential
thereto.
(2)
In the case of a dwelling house, such right of entry,
inspection and monitoring as provided for in this article, will be
subject to giving previous notice of at least forty-eight hours and
shall not apply before half past seven in the morning or after seven
o’clock in the evening.
(3)
Any person who obstructs, threatens, attacks or impedes
any officer of the Authority in the exercise of his duties under this
Act shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable
to imprisonment not exceeding three years or to a fine (multa) of
not more than one hundred thousand euro (€100,000) or to both
such fine and imprisonment. 
Compliance 
monitoring.
72.
(1)
The Authority shall have the power to carry out
inspections and investigations on any occasion and for any purpose
related to the responsibilities pertaining to the Authority under this
Act and subsidiary legislation made thereunder.
(2)
In exercising the duties in sub-article (1), the Authority
shall be granted the right of entry as defined in article 71.
(3)
In the event that non-compliance is proven, further action
under this Act and subsidiary legislation made thereunder shall be
undertaken by the Authority as considered necessary.


--- PAGE 49 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
49
2. Monitoring, Compliance Action and Enforcement of Control
Monitoring.
73.
(1) The Authority shall monitor any aspect and, or activity
falling within the scope of this Act, particularly for the purposes of
environmental surveys, audits and assessments and of ensuring
compliance with the requirements of this Act and with the
decisions lawfully taken under this Act.
(2)
For this purpose, the Authority may appoint officers to,
amongst other matters, collect data, survey, surveil and, or monitor
any activity, aspect or authorisation for the purposes of
environmental surveys and audits and of compliance with
legislation and authorisations.
Review of 
activities.
74.
The Authority may also undertake a review of any such
activities carried out before the coming into force of this Act, or
any other Act preceding this Act, not in compliance with rules,
regulations, plans, policies or authorisations in force at the time the
activity took place; and in respect of any such an activity the
Authority shall have such powers as it has in respect of an activity
carried out after the coming into force of this Act in order to ensure
that the rules, regulations, plans and policies aforesaid are
complied with or to regularise any such an activity to the extent the
Authority deems adequate in the circumstances, or, if this is not
reasonably possible, to enforce said compliance.
Officers.
75.
(1)
The Authority may appoint officers for the purposes of
this Act, and such officers may upon production of proof of their
identity, in order to ensure compliance with this Act or any
regulations made thereunder:
(a)
enquire from any person information in connection
with any activity, ownership or other matter regulated
by this Act;
(b)
order moving vehicles or vessels to stop and open any
cargo or goods area and displace goods as instructed to
enable the officers to carry out immediate, on the spot
inspections, investigations and monitoring;
(c)
take compliance action including the issuing of stop or
compliance orders to any person in accordance with
the provisions of article 76 and the issuing of fines;
(d)
in line with the precautionary principle, issue
temporary stop orders, for a maximum of ten days
every calendar year, for investigations as to the
legality of any activity or for any necessary
monitoring.
Cap. 9.
Cap. 37.
(2)
The provisions of sub-article (1) shall be without prejudice
to the powers of the Police, Community Officers, the Comptroller
of Customs or of any other authority under the Criminal Code, the
Customs Ordinance or any other law.
(3)
Officers appointed under this article shall, notwithstanding
any other law, have the right to assist the police in the conduct of
prosecution for offences under this Act and to plead the case on
behalf of the prosecution.


--- PAGE 50 ---

50
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(4)
The Authority may request the assistance of the Police
Force, of the Armed Forces of Malta, of Transport Malta and any
other competent government entity, and in acceding to such
requests, each of these shall for such purpose exercise such powers
as are vested in them at law.
Compliance 
procedure.
76.
(1)
If it appears to the Authority that an activity is being
carried out without the grant of an authorisation required under this
Act or that any conditions subject to which such authorisation was
granted in respect of any such activity are not being complied with
or such activity is in contravention to this Act or regulations made
under this Act, or if an activity is causing environmental damage or
is contrary to subsidiary environmental legislation, the Authority
may issue stop orders to any such person carrying out such an
activity, or on the owner of the land or on the occupier of the land,
or on all, as the Authority deems most expedient, requiring the
activity to be stopped forthwith:
Provided that the Authority may issue a partial stop order
requiring work or activity to be stopped forthwith only in relation
to that part of the activity to which the order applies and not in
relation to the whole activity:
Provided further that an official may verbally order
activities to stop, and such verbal stoppage orders are to be
considered as legally valid and effective for the successive three
days following the issuing of the verbal stoppage order. Such
stoppage orders would cease to be valid if the Authority does not
either deliver a copy of a signed stop order at an address (postal or
digital) that would have to be given to the compliance officer by
the person responsible for the activity or affix the stop order at the
site of the activities, by the end of the third day following the
issuing of the verbal stoppage order:
Provided further that if it eventually transpires that the
activity should not have been stopped, the Authority or any of its
officers shall not be liable for any damages incurred, unless such
stoppage was prima facie and manifestly unjustified:
Provided also that the Authority is not to await the passage
of three days prior to informing the owner or occupier or person
responsible, if the stoppage order can be lifted and the activity can
continue.
(2)
A copy of the order or notice mentioned in sub-article (1)
which includes an activity relating to a site, may also be served on
any representative on the site and the Authority may also affix such
notice in a prominent position at a point of entry onto the site.
(3)
If it appears to the Authority that any activity has been
carried out after coming into force of this Act without the grant of
authorisation required in that behalf under this Act, or that any
conditions subject to which such authorisation was granted in
respect of any activity have not been complied with, the Authority
may, having regard to the provisions of legislation and any other
material consideration, serve on the owner of the land or on the
occupier of the land or on who was responsible for the unauthorised
activity or on all as the Authority deems most expedient a


--- PAGE 51 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
51
compliance order, requiring such steps as may be specified in the
compliance order to be taken within such time as may also be
specified for remedial action to restore the situation and, or the land
to its condition before the activity took place or for removing the
resultant consequences of the activity or for securing compliance
with the conditions aforesaid, as the case may be; and in particular,
but without prejudice to the generality of the aforesaid any such
notice may, for the purpose aforesaid, require the removal of
objects and substances, the demolition or alteration of any works or
buildings, the discontinuance of any operations or uses, and
remedial action to counteract the effects of the unauthorised
activities.
(4)
The Authority shall register all stop orders and all
compliance orders in terms of this Act and the provisions of the
said article concerning indexing of conservation orders shall
mutatis mutandis apply to stop and other compliance orders in
terms of this Act.
(5)
Any order made under this article shall contain a detailed
description of the infringements and where deemed appropriate, a
site plan indicating the land which is the subject of such an order
shall be annexed thereto.
(6)
An order given under any of the foregoing provisions of
this article shall:
(a)
in respect of any requirement stopping or prohibiting
further activity or requiring the cessation of a use, take
effect immediately upon service of the notice in terms
of sub-article (1) notwithstanding that an application
for an authorisation for the activity referred to in the
order has been submitted or an appeal has been lodged
against the order; and
(b)
in respect of any other requirement, shall take effect at
the expiration of such period (being not less than
fifteen days and not more than thirty days after service
thereof) as may be specified therein.
(7)
Any application to regularise an activity may be dismissed
forthwith if officers establish that a requirement in the order
stopping or prohibiting further activity or requiring the cessation of
a use, has not, both prior or during the pendency of the application,
been complied with or in all cases where any penalty or other
payment for which any person has become liable under this Act in
respect of the relevant activity has not been paid.
(8)
The Authority may exercise its powers under article 77(1)
notwithstanding that a second or subsequent application intended to
regularise the illegal activity may have been filed with the
Authority concerning the same or part of the same activity,
irrespective of whether the said application is filed by the same
applicant or by another applicant.
(9)
Any person who feels aggrieved by any order served on him
may, within fifteen days from the service of the order, appeal
before the Tribunal and on any such appeal the Tribunal:


--- PAGE 52 ---

52
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(a)
if satisfied that an authorisation was granted under this
Act, or under any other law which preceded this Act
regulating the activity in question, for the activity to
which the order relates, or that no such authorisation
was required in respect thereof, as the case may be,
and that the conditions subject to which such
authorisation was granted have been complied with,
shall quash the order to which the appeal relates or
such part thereof in respect of which the Tribunal is
satisfied as aforesaid;
(b)
in any other case, shall dismiss the appeal.
(10) The appellant shall submit to the Tribunal together with his
appeal under sub-article (9) a copy of all relevant authorisations,
other permits or other relevant information in terms of which an
authorisation has been granted to carry out the activity mentioned
in the order served on him which is the subject of the appeal
proceedings; and if the Tribunal is satisfied that no such
authorisation exists, in terms of which and in terms of the
conditions of which the activity could have been carried out, or that
any authorisation had expired, the Tribunal shall forthwith dismiss
the appeal.
(11) If before an appeal under sub-article (9) is lodged or during
the pendency of such appeal, the appellant submits to the Authority
an application for an authorisation regarding the activity mentioned
in the order, the Tribunal shall dismiss the appeal if it is satisfied
that the said application is intended to regularise the activity
mentioned in the order.
(12) Where an appeal under sub-article (9) is dismissed, the
Tribunal may direct that, in respect of any requirement, other than a
requirement stopping or prohibiting any further activity or
requiring the cessation of a use, the order shall not come into force
until such date, being a date not earlier than fifteen days after the
determination of the appeal, as the Tribunal thinks fit.
(13) The Tribunal may correct any defect or error in the
compliance order provided that the appellant shall be given
sufficient time to prepare and put forward his case.
(14) Where the illegal activity is being carried out at sea the
provisions of this article shall apply in such manner that any
reference therein to the owner of the land or the occupier of the
land shall be deemed to be a reference to the person carrying out
the activity, and any reference to land shall be deemed to be a
reference to the area at sea where the activity occurs.
Powers of 
enforcement.
77.
(1)
If 
any 
steps 
or 
other 
action, 
including 
any
discontinuance, stoppage, removal or remediation or similar
requirement, required to be taken by a stop order or a compliance
order or other provisions of this Act or regulations made thereunder
have not been taken within the time specified therein, the Authority
will have the power to take enforcement action so as to enforce the
relevant stop order or compliance order or other provision of this
Act or regulations made thereunder and for this purpose enter on
the land, or the area at sea and take such steps or other action as


--- PAGE 53 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
53
aforesaid, including the disabling or removal of any equipment,
machinery, tools, belongings, vehicles or other objects that may be
on site and the carrying out of any works necessary to comply with
what is requested in the compliance order, or the sealing,
confiscation or impoundment of items whose possession is illegal
according to provisions of this Act or regulations made thereunder,
and may for such purpose request the assistance of the Police
Force, the Armed Forces of Malta, the Department of Customs, any
local council, any department of Government or any entity of
Government.
(2)
The Authority shall not be liable for any damages as a
result of the exercise of its powers under this article unless it is
proved that such damage resulted from gross negligence on the part
of the Authority, its officers and agents.
(3)
At its discretion, the Authority may not return to their
owners any objects whatsoever which are the cause of the activity
subject to the compliance order, and which are confiscated,
impounded, seized or in any way removed by the Authority. The
Authority may also dispose of such objects, where applicable at the
contravenor’s expense, in line with regulations that the Minister
may make.
(4)
Where the enforcement by the Authority of the stop order
or the compliance order involves by necessity the passage also over
third party property, and, or the removal of a development or the
cessation or disruption of an activity that is not itself illegal, or any
other impact on the said activity, the Authority may, under
exceptional circumstances, proceed to pass over such property and,
or to remove such development or to force the cessation of or to
disrupt or to otherwise impact also such other activity.
Cap. 319.
(5)
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law and saving
the provisions of article 46 of the Constitution and article 4 of the
European Convention Act, no precautionary act or other restraining
act may be issued against the Authority hindering it from the proper
exercise of the powers conferred to it by this article.
(6)
The Authority may issue orders for action to remedy
environmental damage without the need to apply for authorisation
from the Authority.
(7)
Subject to the provisions of sub-article (3), any items
legitimately confiscated, impounded, seized or in any way removed
during the exercise of the powers contained in this article, may only
be released by the Authority following the payment of any dues
from these debts resulting from the said action, and only when such
payment happens within five calendar months from the date when
the responsible parties were notified by the Authority of these dues,
or according to payment terms as agreed by the Authority within
ninety days from this date of notification of dues.
(8)
If the payment of debts to the Authority resulting from
actions as set out in this article does not take place within the time
frame stipulated in sub-article (7), any objects whatsoever
confiscated, impounded, seized or in any way removed during the
said action will become the property of the Authority and may be


--- PAGE 54 ---

54
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
disposed of, where applicable at the contravenor’s expense,
according to regulations that the Minister may make to this effect.
Imposition of daily 
fines.
78.
Subject to the provisions of regulations made under this
Act, and without prejudice to the Authority’s powers set out in
article 77, when an operation or a site is subject to a stop order or to
a compliance order, and the provisions of the said stop order or
compliance order are not abided with, the operation or site may be
subject to a daily fine that starts accruing from the date of the first
notification of the stop order or compliance order to any of the
parties to whom the order is served according to the provisions of
article 76. Any person subject to a stop order who fails to comply
with the said order, or when a compliance order has not been
appealed or where a compliance order has been appealed but has
been confirmed, as the case may be, and the person concerned
subject to a compliance order fails to comply with the said order
within the period therein prescribed, such person shall be liable to a
maximum penalty of not more than one hundred and fifty euro
(€150) for every day the default continues after the expiration of
the said period as the Authority may prescribe under the said
regulations; and the Authority may recover such penalty from the
said person as a civil debt owing to it.
Recovery of 
amounts due to the 
Authority.
79.
(1)
All expenses reasonably incurred by the Authority in
the exercise of its powers under this article, or any other amount
due to the Authority under any other provision of this Act or
regulations made thereunder shall be recoverable as a civil debt by
the Authority from the person against whom the order has been
issued, or from any person responsible for the acts mentioned in the
order, including an order for payment, or an applicant, subject to
such right of recovery such person may have against any other
person.
(2)
Where the Authority desires to sue for the recovery of a
debt due to the Authority under any law or regulation which it is
entitled to enforce, the Chairperson or an officer of the Authority
duly authorised by the Authority to act on its behalf may make a
declaration on oath before the Court Registrar or before any other
officer authorised to administer the oath in judicial matters,
wherein he states the nature of the debt and the name of the debtor
and confirm that it is due.
(3)
The declaration referred to in sub-article (2) shall be served
upon the debtor by means of a judicial act and it shall have the
same effect as a final judgement of the competent court unless the
debtor shall, within a period of twenty days from service upon him
of the said declaration, oppose the claim by filing an application
demanding that the court declare the claim unfounded.
(4)
The application filed in terms of sub-article (3) shall be
served upon the Authority, which shall be entitled to file a reply
within a period of twenty days. The court shall appoint the
application for hearing on a date after the lapse of that period.
(5)
Any debts due to the Authority shall be prescribed by the
lapse of the period of five years from the date on which the debt
was due.


--- PAGE 55 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
55
Special procedure.
80.
(1)
The Authority may impose an administrative fine upon
any person:
(a)
who infringes any provision of this Act, regulations
prescribed thereunder or of any other law with which
the Authority is entitled to secure compliance and to
enforce; or
(b)
who fails to comply with any directive or decision
given by the Authority whether under this Act,
regulations prescribed thereunder or under any other
law with which the Authority is entitled to secure
compliance and to enforce; or
(c)
who fails to abide by any stop order or compliance
order and the provisions therein; or
(d)
who fails to comply with any condition of any
authorisation granted under this Act, including with
failure to provide data or information required in
authorisation conditions in a timely and/or appropriate
manner:
Provided that if the infringement is committed by a body
corporate and is proved to have been committed with the consent,
or involvement of, or to be attributable to, any gross negligence on
the part of a person being a director, manager, secretary or other
officer, however so described, of such body corporate or a person
who was purporting to act in any such capacity then such person
and such body corporate shall be responsible for the said
infringement and shall be jointly and severally liable for the
payment of any administrative penalty imposed by the Authority as
a consequence thereof.
(2)
An administrative fine imposed under sub-article (1) shall
not exceed one hundred thousand euro (€100,000) for each
contravention or one thousand five hundred euro (€1,500) for each
day of non-compliance, from the date of the notice of the
imposition of the administrative fine given by the Authority.
Proceedings when 
imposing 
administrative 
fines.
81.
(1)
The Authority, before imposing an administrative
penalty upon any person who infringes or fails to comply with -
(a)
any provision of this Act;
(b)
regulations made thereunder;
(c)
any other law with which the Authority is entitled to
secure compliance and to enforce;
(d)
any directive or decision given by the Authority
whether under this Act, regulations made thereunder
or under any other law with which the Authority is
entitled to secure compliance and to enforce;
(e)
any provisions or time-frames included in any stop
order or compliance order; or
(f)
any condition, limitation or approved specification of
any authorisation granted under this Act,
shall by notice to the person concerned -


--- PAGE 56 ---

56
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
(i)
give notice of the administrative penalty that
may be imposed by the Authority;
(ii)
give notice of the specific reason why such
penalty may be imposed;
(iii)
give notice of the amount of the penalty; and
(iv)
demand that the person concerned rectify the
acts or omissions committed by such person and,
or make submissions to the Authority within a
specified time:
Provided that such time may not be more than twenty
days or less than five days from the date of service of
the notice:
Provided further that the person against whom an
administrative penalty may be imposed, shall be given a reasonable
opportunity during such period of time as may be stipulated in the
notice to make submissions to the Authority and to propose any
remedies that rectify the acts or omissions required by the
Authority to be so rectified.
(2)
In the notice mentioned in sub-article (1), the Authority
may impose such conditions as it may consider reasonable in the
circumstances.
(3)
If the person concerned remedies the infringement to the
Authority’s satisfaction within the period established by the
Authority in accordance with sub-article (1), and agrees in writing
to abide with any conditions that the Authority may impose and
pays any accrued daily fines to which the said infringement was
subjected in terms of article 78, the Authority shall desist from
proceeding any further:
Provided that if the person concerned, after having been
bound in writing as stated above, fails to remedy the infringement
to the Authority’s satisfaction within the period established by the
Authority in accordance with sub-article (1) or fails to abide with
any terms or conditions agreed to in writing, the Authority shall
impose against such person an administrative penalty for such
failure, in addition to the administrative penalty which may be
imposed for the infringement itself.
(4)
If, after the lapse of the period mentioned in sub-article (1),
the Authority considers that the person concerned has not given any
valid reasons to demonstrate why no administrative penalty should
be imposed against such person, the Authority shall proceed to
impose such administrative penalty.
(5)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, where
the Authority has prima facie evidence that the infringement
represents an immediate and serious threat to the environment, or
to public safety or public security or public health, the Authority
may shorten the periods mentioned in sub-article (1):
Provided that the person against whom such administrative
penalty is imposed shall be given a reasonable opportunity to state
any views and propose any possible remedies:
Provided further that if the person against whom the notice


--- PAGE 57 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
57
has been issued files an appeal before the Tribunal and,
concurrently with or before, the filing of the appeal requests the
Tribunal to suspend the effects of the notice, then the Authority
shall desist from issuing a judicial act as referred to in this sub-
article until the request of suspension has been determined,
withdrawn or otherwise dealt with:
Provided further that the Tribunal shall determine any
requests for suspension referred to in this sub-article expeditiously.
Before determining any such request the Tribunal shall give the
Authority a reasonable opportunity to reply and make its
submissions, within a period not less than three working days.
Cap. 12.
(6)
The notice referred to in sub-article (1), upon the expiry of
the time limit for appeal therefrom, and upon the service of a copy
thereof by means of a judicial act on the person liable to the
payment of the administrative penalty, shall constitute an executive
title for all effects and the purposes of article 253(a) of the Code of
Organization and Civil Procedure.
(7)
The Authority shall give its reasons for any decision taken
under this article.
(8)
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, no
precautionary warrant or order shall be issued by any court
restraining the Authority from the exercise of any of the powers
conferred upon it under this Act in relation to administrative
penalties.
(9)
In all cases where the Authority imposes an administrative
penalty and any action in respect of anything done or omitted to be
done by any person and such act or omission also constitutes a
criminal offence, no proceedings may be taken or continued against
the said person in respect of such criminal offence if such person
settles the penalty and any imposed action:
Provided that payment of the administrative penalty and the
carrying out of any imposed action shall not extinguish any civil
liability to make good any damages to any person or authority or to
the environment in terms of environmental liability.
(10) An administrative penalty imposed by the Authority upon
any person shall be considered a civil debt owing to the Authority.
(11) Measures whereby the liquidated value of damage to the
environment, or of any infringement falling within the scope of this
Act, can be settled, debited or offset, inter alia against payments
due for public services, public goods or public projects.
On-the-spot fines.
82.
Officers of the Authority appointed for such purpose may
impose on-the-spot fines, not exceeding a maximum amount of one
thousand euro (€1,000), for offences and to amounts as shall be
prescribed in regulations issued by the Minister. 
Out of court 
settlement.
83.
Notwithstanding any other law providing for the trial and
punishment of offences, where the Authority believes that a person
has committed an offence against this Act, the Authority may enter
into an agreement in writing with such person describing the
offence of which the person is accused, indicating the steps to be


--- PAGE 58 ---

58
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
taken to remedy the offence and a penalty which is agreed to be
paid in respect of that offence as shall be prescribed in regulations
made by the Minister.
PART VIII
Offences
Offences.
84.
(1)
Any person who -
(a)
carries out any activity without an authorisation as in
force at the time of such activity, or, if the activity is
carried out with an authorisation, fails to comply or to
cause compliance with any condition, restriction or
other limitation to which the authorisation is subject;
or
(b)
acts in contravention of any of the provisions of article
70 in respect of any protected area, or an emergency
conservation order; or
(c)
having been served with a stop or compliance order or
other order under article 76 fails to comply with any of
the requirements of such notice within the time therein
specified; or
(d)
attempts to hinder, obstruct, threaten, molest or
interfere with, any officer of the Authority, or relatives
thereof, or any police officer, or any public officer, or
any officer of any department of Government or of any
entity of Government or of any local council, in the
execution of his duties under the law or fails to comply
with any reasonable requirement demanded of him by
any such person as aforesaid or otherwise to assist him
in the carrying out of the said duties, or knowingly
furnishes such person with false information or
neglects or refuses to give any information required
for the purpose aforesaid; or
(e)
makes a declaration for any of the purposes of this Act
which is false, misleading or incorrect in any material
respect,
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall be liable, on
conviction, to a fine (multa) of not less than one thousand five
hundred euro (€1,500) and not exceeding two million five hundred
thousand euro (€2,500,000), and in respect of an offence under
paragraph (d) or, in the case of an offence under paragraph (c) if the
offender persists in the offence for more than three months, also to
imprisonment for a term of not less than three months and not
exceeding three years:
Provided that, and without prejudice to the provisions of
article 69(6) and article 78 and without prejudice to the maximum
fine above established, the minimum fine (multa) to which an
offender is liable under this article shall not be less than the value
of any work carried out without an authorisation or in violation of
any conditions to which such authorisation was subject.
(2)
The Court, besides awarding the punishment referred to in


--- PAGE 59 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
59
sub-article (1), may confiscate the corpus delicti where applicable
and shall order the offender to remove the causes of the offence and
to undo anything which was done without an authorisation or to
comply with the conditions imposed in the authorisation, as the
case may be, within a time sufficient for the purpose, but in any
case not exceeding three months from the date of the judgment, to
be fixed by the court; and, if the offender fails to comply with any
such order within the time so fixed, he shall be liable to a fine
(multa) of not less than fifty euro (€50) and not more than one
hundred and thirty euro (€130), as the court may fix, for every day
the default continues after the expiration of the said time and the
Court may also order the modification, suspension or revocation of
any authorisation.
Cap. 9.
(3)
Proceedings against any person for any offence as is
mentioned in sub-article (1) shall be taken before the Court of
Magistrates (Malta) or the Court of Magistrates (Gozo), as the case
may be, as courts of criminal judicature in accordance with the
provisions of the Criminal Code:
Cap. 9.
Provided that, notwithstanding the provisions of article
376(1)(b) of the Criminal Code, the Court shall, at the request of
the prosecution or of the accused, take down evidence given by the
witnesses in the manner provided for either in article 390(6) of the
said Code or in any law for the time being in force.
Cap. 9.
Cap. 446.
(4)
Article 21 of the Criminal Code and the provisions of the
Probation Act shall not apply to any offences referred to in this
article.
(5)
Neither the filing of an application intended to regularise
any activity to which a prosecution refers, nor the filing of an
appeal against a refusal or partial approval of such an application
shall be a bar to the continuation of such a prosecution and the
court shall continue to hear such a case and shall give judgment and
shall issue an order in terms of sub-article (2) as if such an
application or such an appeal had never been filed:
Provided that where such an activity has been regularised
no fine under sub-article (2) shall be due in respect of the time after
the activity has been regularised and all fines paid to the Authority.
Cap. 9.
(6)
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Criminal Code, the
Attorney General shall always have a right of appeal to the Court of
Criminal Appeal from any judgment given in proceedings arising
out of this Act or of any regulations, rules or orders made
thereunder.
(7)
Any action taken under the provisions of this article shall
be without prejudice to any action that may be taken against any
person under regulations made in accordance with the provisions of
article 69(6). 
Certified copies of 
documents.
85.
In any proceeding or prosecution under this Act, a copy of
any order, notice, decision or other document purporting to have
been made under this Act and purporting to have been signed by the
Chairperson of the Authority or any Director, shall be accepted as
evidence of the order, notice, decision or other document, and of
the facts appearing therein, without further proof.


--- PAGE 60 ---

60
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
PART IX
Miscellaneous
Service of notices, 
etc., under this Act.
86.
(1)
Where any notice, order, other instrument or document
whatsoever is required or authorised to be served or given by or
under this Act, it may be served or given in any of the following
manners:
(a)
by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be
served or to whom it is to be given; or
(b)
by leaving it at the usual or last known place of abode
of that person or, if such person has furnished an
address for service, at that address; or
(c)
by sending it in a registered letter addressed to that
person at the place of abode or the address for service
aforesaid; or
(d)
in the case of a body corporate or other body of
persons, by delivering it to an officer or servant
thereof at the registered or principal office, or sending
it in a registered letter addressed to the body aforesaid
at that office; or
(e)
in any case in which it is not reasonably possible to
effect service in any of the foregoing manners whether
on all or on any one or more of the persons on whom
service is to be made or notice is to be given, by
affixing the document to be served or given in a
conspicuous place on the land to which it relates and
keeping it so affixed for a period of not less than seven
days; or
(f)
in any case in which it is not reasonably possible to
effect service in any of the manners prescribed in (a)
to (e) whether on all or on any one or more of the
persons on whom service is to be made or notice is to
be given, by publication in a local newspaper; or
(g) where the order, notice, or other document to be served
or given is affixed on the land but is removed before
the expiry period of seven days, the reaffixing of the
order, notice or other document shall only be for the
remaining period after the document was removed.
(2)
Where the notice or other document is required or
authorised to be served or given to any person as having an interest
in land, and the name of that person cannot be ascertained after
reasonable inquiry, or is required or authorised to be served on an
occupier of land, the notice shall be deemed to be duly served or
given if it is served or given in any of the manners indicated in sub-
article (1) and addressed to the person having an interest in the land
by the description of "owner" or "occupier", or "owners" or
"occupiers", as the case may require.
(3) A person who at any time after an order, notice or other
document is affixed pursuant to this article, removes, damages or
defaces the said affixed order, notice or other document during its
term of validity without lawful authority shall be guilty of an


--- PAGE 61 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
61
offence and shall be subject to a fine according to the provisions of
article 82.
Saving.
Cap. 504.
87.
(1)
The Minister may with effect from such date as may be
established by notice in the Gazette repeal the Environment and
Development Planning Act and different dates, rules and
procedures may be so established for the revocation and, or
applicability of different provisions thereof.
Cap. 504.
(2)
The Minister may by regulations made under this Act,
provide that for the words "Director" and "Director Environment
Protection", wherever they may occur in regulations made under
the Environment and Development Planning Act, there shall be
substituted the word "Authority" and any definition of "Director"
and "Director Environment Protection" in regulations made under
the same Acts shall be deleted.
Cap. 504.
(3)
Any order, rule, regulation, bye-law, notice, plan or policy
or other instrument having the force of law made under the
authority or kept in force under any of the provisions of the
Environment and Development Planning Act shall continue in force
and shall continue to have effect as if made under this Act and may
be amended, substituted or revoked accordingly.
Cap. 504.
(4)
Any licence, permission, authority, order, notice or
certificate, or any prosecution or charges granted or made under or
kept in force under any of the provisions of the Environment and
Development Planning Act and still in force immediately before the
date of coming into force of this Act, shall as from such date
continue in force as if it were a licence, permission, authority,
order, notice or certificate, or prosecution or charges granted or
made under a corresponding provision of this Act, and any such
licence, permission, authority, order, notice or certificate, or
prosecution or charges as aforesaid shall be treated and dealt with
accordingly:
Provided that in the case of any such licence, permission,
authority, order, notice or certificate issued as operative for a
specific period, such licence, permission, authority, order, notice or
certificate shall remain operative for such a period from the date
such licence, permission, authority, order, notice or certificate was
issued.
Cap. 504.
(5)
The Environment Fund established under the provisions of
article 32, shall perform and succeed all the functions, assets,
rights, liabilities and obligations of the Environment Fund
established under the provisions of the Environment and
Development Planning Act.
(6)
The Minister may by regulations made under this Act
provide that the Authority shall be considered as the competent
Authority for any matters listed in this article.


--- PAGE 62 ---

62
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION


--- PAGE 63 ---

     
 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
[CAP. 549. 
63
SCHEDULE
[Article 58(2)]
The activities and operations referred to in article 58(1) include, amongst others,
the following:
(a)
in relation to biodiversity and other natural features:
(i)
for whatever purpose, trade in, sell, buy, exchange, transfer or
dispose, extract or abstract, transport, import, export or re-export
such specimens of flora, fauna or other natural features, as may be
prescribed whether dead or alive in whole or in part, including
any derivatives thereof;
(ii)
have such specimens as may be prescribed in transit;
(iii)
have in his possession such specimens as may be prescribed;
(iv)
handle such specimens as may be prescribed, in any manner
including the ringing and tagging thereof;
(v)
mount, stuff, trap, shoot or capture such specimens as may be
prescribed;
(vi)
deliberately pick, collect, cut, destroy, kill, pursue, take, damage,
capture such specimens as may be prescribed;
(vii)
uproot, fell, prune or carry out any surgical or other interventions
on such specimens as may be prescribed;
(viii)
 use prohibited means of capture and killing as may be prescribed;
(ix)
manage invasive and alien species as may be prescribed;
(x)
introduce or reintroduce species as may be prescribed;
(xi)
carry out activities in protected areas considered to have an effect
on the diversity and the integrity of the site or its environmental
characteristics;
(xii)
carry out any activity which goes counter to the principles of
ecological, 
geological, 
geomorphological, 
hydrology 
and
landscape restoration or of good-practice conservation and
management of biodiversity, natural features, landscapes and
protected areas, as may be prescribed, including but not limited
to:
1.
activities which are expected to cause permanent or
prolonged or otherwise significant alterations;
2.
afforestation, planting, deforestation and removal of natural
vegetation;
3.
activities expected to generate, intensify or modify ambient
noise, vibrations, light pollution, currents or other
disturbances to the environment;
4.
activities involving fires, fireworks, spillage hazards or
other potentially hazardous factors;
5.
activities considered to have an effect on biological
diversity, on the physical aspect of the site, or on the
integrity of the site and the landscape;
6.
off-roading activities or events;
7.
cleaning or dredging of valleys;
(xiii)
modify, endanger the stability of or demolish any natural physical
features, or any rural structures affording a habitat for flora and


--- PAGE 64 ---

64
[CAP. 549.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
fauna or otherwise contributing to the integrity of the landscape
or the physical environment, as may be prescribed;
(xiv)
 manage biological diversity as may be prescribed;
(xv)
for the access to genetic resources and their benefit-sharing;
(b)
in relation to waste management:
(i)
store, treat, collect, transfer, recover or otherwise manage or
handle such waste as may be prescribed;
(ii)
act as broker for the carrying out of the functions mentioned in
sub-paragraph (i);
(iii)
trade in, import or export waste;
(iv)
have such waste as may be prescribed in transit;
(v)
operate waste management facilities;
(c)
in relation to pollution control, conduct operations that discharge or
cause or permit to be discharged such substance as may be prescribed
into the environment;
(d)
in relation to the contained use of genetically modified organisms:
(i)
deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified
organisms;
(ii)
trade in genetically modified organisms;
(iii)
manage or otherwise have in his possession genetically modified
organisms;
(e)
any other activity as may be prescribed by regulations.
