

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
SAMOA 
 
 
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT ACT 2008 
 
Arrangement of Provisions 
 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. 
Short title and 
commencement 
2. 
Interpretation 
3. 
Act binds State 
 
PART II 
PRINCIPLES OF 
SUSTAINABLE 
MANAGEMENT 
 
4. 
Water resources to be 
managed on a sustainable 
basis 
5. 
Application of the 
precautionary principle 
 
PART III 
RIGHTS TO CONTROL AND 
MANAGE THE WATER 
RESOURCE 
 
6. 
State control of water 
resources 
7. 
The rights of State Utilities 
and Independent Water 
Schemes 
8. 
Rights of the Fire Service to 
access and use water for fire 
prevention and response 
 
PART IV 
POWERS OF THE 
MINISTRY OVER THE 
WATER RESOURCE 
 
9. 
Objectives of water resource 
management 
10. Powers of the Minister 
11. Offences against this Part 
 
PART V 
REGULATING THE TAKING 
OF WATER 
 
12. Licences and permits to take 
water 
13. Requests for a review of a 
decision 
14. Environment and health 
standards applying to water 
15. Offences against this Part 
 
PART VI 
SAMOA WATER 
RESOURCES BOARD 
 
16. The Samoa Water Resources 
Board 
17. Functions and Powers of the 
Board 
 
PART VII 
SAMOA WATER RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 


--- PAGE 2 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
2
18.  Elements of the Samoa 
Water Resource 
Management Plan 
19. Environment Impact 
Assessments, Planning 
Schemes and other plans to 
be consistent with the Plan 
 
PART VIII 
WATERSHED 
MANAGEMENT 
 
20. Interpretation in this Part 
21. Functions of the Board in 
relation to watershed 
management 
22. Powers of the Board in 
relation to watershed 
management 
23. Preparation of a watershed 
management plan 
24. Contents of plans 
25. Process of Plan Preparation 
26. Finalisation of a watershed 
management plan 
27. Publication of a plan 
28. Variation of a plan 
29.  Reserves and Closed Areas 
30. Offence to breach a 
management plan  
31. Responsibilities of officers, 
etc 
32. Powers of Government 
agencies etc 
PART IX 
COMMUNITY 
INVOLVEMENT IN WATER 
MANAGEMENT 
 
33. Village and community  
 
by-laws 
34. Other community based 
programs and initiatives 
 
PART X 
POWERS TO MONITOR 
AND ENFORCE 
 
35. Appointment of authorised 
officers 
36. Powers of authorised officers 
37. Precautionary Notice 
38. Notice to cease an activity 
39. Offences and penalties 
related to notices 
40. Prosecution of offences 
41. Requirement to provide 
information, data etc. 
 
PART XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS 
 
42. General offences 
43. Fees 
44.  Protection of persons 
performing duties under this 
Act 
45. Regulations 
46. Emergency Regulations 
47. Savings provisions 
48. Repeals and consequential 
amendments 
 
 
______________ 
 
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT ACT 2008 
2008 
,No. 31 
 
AN ACT to provide for the management, protection and 
conservation of the water resources of Samoa. 


--- PAGE 3 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
3
[Assent date: 5 November 2008] 
[Commencement Date: 6 April 2009] 
 
BE IT ENACTED by the Legislative Assembly of Samoa in 
Parliament assembled as follows: 
 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. Short title and commencement– (1)This Act may be 
cited as the Water Resources Management Act 2008. 
(2) This Act commences on a date set by the Minister by the 
publication of a notice to that effect in the Savali. 
 
2. Interpretation– 
In 
this 
Act, 
unless 
the 
context 
otherwise requires: 
―abstract‖ and ―abstraction‖ means the taking of water from 
a water source; 
―aquifer‖ 
means 
any 
naturally 
occurring 
underground 
source of freshwater; 
―Board‖ 
means 
the 
Samoa 
Water 
Resources 
Board 
established under section 16; 
―by-law‖ means a by-law made under section 33; 
―Chief 
Executive 
Officer‖ 
means the Chief Executive 
Officer of the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment; 
―discharge‖ means to throw, place, put, pump, allow, pour, 
permit or otherwise cause any pollutant to enter or affect 
the water resource, either directly, indirectly or through 
run-off; 
―Electric Power Corporation‖ means the Electric Power 
Corporation 
established 
by 
the 
Electric 
Power 
Corporation Act 1980, and includes a person that might 
later assume the role of that Corporation under law; 
―Fire and Emergency Service‖ means the Samoa Fire and 
Emergency Services Authority established under the 
Fire and Emergency Service Act 2007; 
―groundwater‖ means water naturally stored or flowing 
beneath the surface of the ground and which is not 
apparent on the surface of the ground; 
―Independent Water Scheme‖ means: 


--- PAGE 4 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
4
(a)  a Water Supply Committee originally established 
under the Water Act 1965 or any other law; or 
(b)  an Independent Water Scheme registered under this 
Act, – 
which continues to provide a water supply to any village 
or community in Samoa; 
―lens‖ means an underground sheet of freshwater suspended 
above saline water; 
―Minister‖ means the Minister of Natural Resources and 
Environment; 
―Ministry‖ means the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment; 
―overdraft‖ means the abstraction of water within a 
particular geographic area at such a rate or in such a 
quantity that the abstraction exceeds the rate of recharge 
of the groundwater aquifer or other water source from 
which the water is abstracted; 
―pollutant‖ means any liquid, gaseous or solid substance 
that contaminates the water so as to change the physical 
or chemical condition of it in such a manner as to make 
the water unclean, noxious, offensive or impure, or so as 
to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or 
persons using, consuming or residing in the vicinity of 
the water; 
―safe yield‖ means the abstraction of water from a water 
source at a rate and in an amount so as not to cause an 
overdraft from that source; 
―Water Authority‖ means the Samoa Water Authority 
established under the Samoa Water Authority Act 2003, 
and includes a person that might later assume the role of 
the Samoa Water Authority under law; 
―water‖ includes any river, stream, watercourse, reservoir, 
well, bore, tank, dam, channel, lake, swamp and all 
ground water; 
―water resource‖ means the surface and ground waters in 
aquifers, 
lakes, 
falls, 
rivers, 
streams, 
springs and 
watershed or water catchment areas under the control of 
the Ministry in accordance with this Act, and includes 
water in coastal areas where freshwater accumulates or 
discharges and is mixed with seawater; 


--- PAGE 5 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
5
―watershed‖ means any area of land that a river system 
drains through, and which is determined to be a 
watershed by the Board, and includes all watershed 
areas saved by section 42; 
―water source‖ includes all sources of water from lakes, 
rivers, streams, wells, aquifers, streams, springs and any 
other source of freshwater within Samoa which is or 
may be used for water supply purposes.  
 
3. Act binds State– This Act binds the State. 
 
PART II 
PRINCIPLES OF SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT 
 
4. Water resources to be managed on a sustainable 
basis–(1) In this Part: 
―sustainable development‖ means promoting development 
at a rate and in such a way as to ensure that the quality 
of the environment and the supply of resources is 
maintained and, wherever practicable, enhanced to 
meet the needs of the present generation without 
compromising the needs of future generations. 
(2) The Ministry shall ensure that the principles of 
sustainable development are applied to the management and 
development of the water resource. 
(3) The principles of sustainable development are to be 
applied to the conservation and management of the water 
resource by: 
(a)  the 
formulation, 
approval 
and 
application 
of 
policies and programmes which are based on 
those principles; and 
(b)  the 
declaration 
and 
effective 
management 
of 
protected 
and 
closed 
areas, 
watershed 
management 
areas 
and water reserves and 
easements. 
 
5. Application of the precautionary principle–(1) All 
persons and agencies having responsibilities under this Act, or 
whose functions and powers may relate to any matter or thing 
involving the management of water resources in Samoa, or the 
regulation, control, or management of a substance, matter or 


--- PAGE 6 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
6
thing which may adversely impact upon Samoa’s water 
resources, 
shall 
apply 
the precautionary approach when 
discharging their responsibilities and functions, or exercising 
their powers. 
(2) To clarify the application of subsection (1), the 
precautionary approach is applied if, in the event of a threat of 
damage to Samoa’s water resources or to the environment of 
Samoa, or a risk to human health in Samoa, a lack of full 
scientific certainty regarding the extent of adverse effects is not 
used as a reason for not acting to prevent or minimise the 
potential adverse effects or risks arising in any way from a 
matter or thing regulated under any law. 
 
PART III 
RIGHTS TO CONTROL AND MANAGE THE  
WATER RESOURCE 
 
6. State control of water resources–(1) The sole right to 
permit the use of water in lakes, falls, rivers, streams, springs 
and aquifers in Samoa for the purpose of supplying water for 
domestic, agricultural, pastoral, industrial or commercial uses, 
or for the purpose of generating or storing electricity or other 
power, and to otherwise manage and control such waters, 
remains vested in the Government.  
(2) The granting of rights to take or use water referred to in 
subsection (1) may only be done in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act. 
(3) The powers of the Government under this section are to 
be exercised in a manner which takes account of the rights of 
use of the water resource recognised in the Samoa Water 
Resource Management Plan as provided for in section 12(7), 
and the local management of water sources in accordance with 
by-laws made under section 33. 
(4) Nothing in this Act affects any rights of customary 
ownership of land in Samoa, and no action may be taken under 
this Act to deprive existing rights to land and resources held in 
accordance with the customs and traditions of Samoa. 
(5) The regulatory controls exercised by government under 
the authority of this Act shall be applied so as to ensure that the 
benefits of the water resources of Samoa are maximised and 
enjoyed fairly by all persons having need of water. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
7
7. The rights of State Utilities and Independent Water 
Schemes–(1)The Samoa Water Authority, Independent Water 
Schemes and the Electric Power Corporation are entitled to take 
and use water for the discharge of their respective functions, but 
shall comply with any conditions, procedures, restriction or 
controls imposed in the exercise of powers under this Act. 
(2) The Ministry has the right to use the water resource for 
any purpose associated with the protection or management of 
the environment, where such use is consistent with the Samoa 
Water Resource Management Plan. 
(3) The Ministry shall recognise the rights of individuals 
and communities to access water for the purposes of supplying 
water to meet the needs of those individuals and communities, 
and the provisions of this Act shall be applied accordingly. 
 
8. Rights of the Fire Service to access and use water for 
fire prevention and response–(1) The Fire and Emergency 
Service may take water from a water source for the purpose of 
controlling or extinguishing fires which threaten human life or 
property. 
(2) The use of water from water sources by the Fire and 
Emergency Service for activities relating to fire prevention shall 
be undertaken in accordance with the Samoa Water Resource 
Management Plan. 
(3) The Fire and Emergency Service may take any action 
necessary and consistent with the Fire and Emergency Service 
Act 2007 to protect water sources from the effects of fire. 
 
PART IV 
POWERS OF THE MINISTRY OVER  
THE WATER RESOURCE 
 
9. Objectives 
of 
water 
resource 
management–The 
Ministry shall implement this Act and manage the water 
resource so as to achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  the sustainable management of the water resource 
through 
coordinated 
and 
scientifically 
sound 
planning of water resource development and 
regulated 
water 
utilisation 
for 
all 
lawful 
purposes; 


--- PAGE 8 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
8
(b) the avoidance of overdrafts of available water 
supplies 
through 
the 
establishment 
of 
an 
inventory of water resources and the effective 
monitoring of water levels; 
(c)  the improvement of the chemical, physical and 
biological integrity of the water resource by— 
(i)  regular monitoring of water quality;  
(ii) promoting 
coordination 
amongst 
all 
agencies 
of 
government 
having 
roles 
and 
functions 
associated 
with 
the 
testing 
and 
monitoring of water quality and supply; 
(iii)  recording the results of monitoring and 
maintaining records of other matters associated 
with the management of the water resource; and 
(iv) the control of pollutant discharges; and 
(d)  assisting with the proper assessment of the impacts 
of proposed developments on the water resource, 
and facilitating the implementation of effective 
urban and rural planning regimes that take 
account of water supply and water quality issues. 
 
10.Powers of the Minister– (1) In order to meet the 
objectives stated in section 9, the Minister has the power to: 
(a)  consider applications for the taking and use of 
water in accordance with Part V; 
(b) give approvals, and to vary and revoke an approval, 
in accordance with Part V; 
(c)  consider competing claims for the taking and use of 
water and make determinations in relation to 
disputes 
between 
water 
users, 
such 
determinations being binding and final on the 
parties competing for the use of water; 
(d)  place restrictions on the right to take or use water, 
either in relation to particular users or so as to 
apply generally, if circumstances require that 
water conservation measures be imposed; 
(e) set standards applying to any activity or equipment 
associated with the taking of water or the 
utilisation of the water resource, and regulate or 
prohibit any such activity or the use of any such 
equipment; 


--- PAGE 9 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
9
(f)  declare any area to be a water source protection 
zone on the recommendation of the Board, and 
determine that the designated area shall be 
managed in accordance with a management plan 
approved by the Board to apply to the water 
source protection zone; 
(g)  otherwise regulate and control the utilisation of the 
water resource, and any activity that may affect 
the quality of water or the quantity of water 
supply; 
(h) direct that notices be given to persons to cease 
activities or practices having a detrimental effect 
on the quality of water or the quantity of the 
water resource, which may require the removal 
of a structure or thing having such an impact; 
(i)  arrange for the removal of a structure or thing not 
having been removed in accordance with a notice 
given under paragraph (h), and to recover the 
cost from the person in default; and 
(j) require that certain matters relating to the water 
resource be considered in the assessment of 
environmental 
impacts 
of 
proposed 
developments required under the Environment 
Impact Assessment requirements applying under 
the Planning and Urban Management Act 2004, 
and any other applicable law. 
(2) The Minister may, by written notice, require a person 
who has drilled a borehole or who has been taking water prior 
to the commencement of this Act to comply with any 
requirement imposed by this Act and by the Minister under 
subsection (1), and the written notice delivered to that person 
shall state a date by which compliance is to be achieved. 
(3) The powers of the Minister under this section may be 
exercised: 
(a) by the making of written determinations and orders 
under the hand of the Minister; or 
(b)  under any regulations made under this Act to give 
effect to the objectives stated in section 9, and to 
facilitate the exercise of the powers conferred by 
this section. 


--- PAGE 10 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
10
(4) Any regulations made under subsection (3) may 
prescribe offences and impose penalties for the breach of such 
offences being fines not exceeding 100 penalty units, or to a 
term of imprisonment not exceeding 1 year, or to both such fine 
and imprisonment.  
(5) The Minister may delegate, by instrument in writing, any 
of the powers provided for by this section to the Chief 
Executive Officer or any other officer of the Ministry. 
 
11. Offences against this Part– A person commits an 
offence who: 
(a)  fails to comply with a determination made by the 
Minister under section 10(1)(c) in relation to 
competing uses of the water resource; 
(b) fails to comply with a restriction placed by the 
Minister under section 10(1)(d); 
(c) fails to comply with a standard set under section 
10(1)(e) while undertaking any activity or using 
any equipment associated with the taking of 
water; 
(d) unlawfully undertakes any activity or uses any 
equipment 
which 
has 
been 
regulated 
or 
prohibited under section 10(1)(e); 
(e) fails to comply with a notice given by the Minister 
under section 10(1)(h); 
(f) fails to meet the cost of complying with the 
requirement of a notice given by the Minister 
under section 10(1)(h); or 
(g) fails to comply with a notice given under section 
10(2), – 
and upon conviction is liable to a fine not exceeding 250 
penalty units if the offence is committed by an individual 
person or persons, or 500 penalty units if the offence is 
committed by a company, and to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding 1 year, or to both such a fine and imprisonment. 
 
PART V 
REGULATING THE TAKING OF WATER 
 
12. Licences and permits to take water– (1)Subject to 
subsection (7), no person may: 


--- PAGE 11 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
11
(a)  drill for water; 
(b) dig for water or construct a well; 
(c)  make or use a bore for the purpose of taking water 
from the water resource; 
(d) otherwise take water from the water resource of 
Samoa; 
(e) investigate the water resource for the purpose of 
identifying a commercial source of water or for 
scientific research; or 
(f) undertake any activity in or affecting the water 
resource which the Minister determines by Order 
to require a licence under this Part, – 
unless he or she is the holder of a licence or permit to do so 
issued by the Ministry in accordance with this Act. 
(2)An application for a licence or permit under subsection 
(1) shall: 
(a)  be made in writing to the Chief Executive Officer in 
a form approved by the Chief Executive Officer; 
(b) be accompanied by an application fee as prescribed 
by Order made by the Minister; 
(c) include such additional information in relation to 
the proposed or current activities, as may be 
required by the Chief Executive Officer; and 
(d) be accompanied by a signed undertaking by, or on 
behalf of the applicant, that the— 
(i)  drilling or water taking activities; or 
(ii)  investigation or scientific research, 
Must be in accordance with the provisions of the Samoa Water 
Resource Management Plan and the requirements of this Act. 
(3) All applications made under this section must be referred 
to the Division of Water Resources for confirmation that the 
drilling or water taking activities, or investigation and research, 
shall: 
(a)  be in accordance with the provisions of the Samoa 
Water Resource Management Plan; 
(b)  not contravene any standards, control, prohibition 
or requirement applying under this Act; 
(c)  not adversely affect the water quality of the water 
resource or any aspect of the water supply in 
Samoa;  


--- PAGE 12 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
12
(d)  not deprive a village or community relying on that 
source; 
(e)  for a source in the vicinity of a village, be in 
accordance with an approval given by the 
relevant village fono for the drilling or water 
taking activities to be undertaken; and 
(f)  for a source on privately owned land, be in 
accordance with an approval given by the owner 
for the drilling or water taking activities. 
(4) Upon confirmation of the matters specified in subsection 
(3), the Minister may authorise that a licence or permit be 
granted. 
(5)A licence or permit granted under this section: 
(a)  may impose any conditions as to the means of 
abstraction, quantity of water, placement of a 
bore, well, abstraction equipment or head works, 
and any other matter that may assist in the 
protection, conservation and sound management 
of the water resource; and 
(b)  must, if the licence or permit authorises the taking 
of water, state: 
(i)  the quantity of water that may be 
abstracted; 
(ii)  the rate at which the water may be 
abstracted (which may be stated on a daily, 
monthly or annual basis, or any combination of 
these); and 
(iii)  the permissible means by which the 
water may be abstracted. 
(6) A licence granted under this section shall be valid for a 
period of up to 5 years as determined by the Minister, but may 
be varied, suspended or revoked by the Minister for a purpose 
that is consistent with the protection, conservation or sound 
management of the water resource. 
(7) The Samoa Water Resource Management Plan may 
apply processes for permitting certain persons to take water 
from a water source without a licence or permit issued under 
this section, if the person: 
(a)  is entitled to a right of access to the particular water 
resource from a water source in accordance with 
this Act or an approved policy on rights of 


--- PAGE 13 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
13
access to the water resource, which shall form 
part of the Samoa Water Resource Management 
Plan; or 
(b)  intends to abstract a quantity of water which is less 
than the volume of water set by the Samoa Water 
Resource 
Management 
Plan 
as 
being 
the 
maximum amount of water which may be 
abstracted without a licence. 
(8) A person who lawfully abstracts water without a licence 
by reason of subsection (7) must comply with all other 
provisions of this Act and with the requirements imposed by the 
Samoa Water Resource Management Plan. 
(9) The Minister may suspend or cancel a licence or permit 
if it is necessary for the proper management of the water 
resource, or on the grounds that the holder of the licence or 
permit has: 
(a)  breached a provision of this Act, or breached any 
other law which has had consequences on the 
proper management of the water resource; 
(b)  provided any false or misleading information in an 
application, 
or 
which 
has 
otherwise 
been 
required to be provided under this Act; 
(c)  failed to comply with a condition applying to the 
licence or permit; or 
(d)  failed to pay a fee or charge relating to the licence 
or permit or the activities authorised by it. 
 
13. Requests for a review of a decision– (1)An applicant 
who is aggrieved by a decision of the Minister made under 
section 12 may, within 28 days of the decision being made, 
request a reconsideration of the application or decision by: 
(a)  giving written notice to the Chief Executive Officer 
stating the grounds upon which the request is 
made and providing evidence and information to 
establish that the proposed activities— 
(i)  are consistent with the Samoa Water 
Resource Management Plan; and 
(ii) must not adversely impact upon the 
quantity or quality of the water resource; and 


--- PAGE 14 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
14
(iii)  must not impact upon the availability of 
water to meet the needs of villages and 
communities; and 
(b)  paying any fee prescribed by Order made by the 
Minister. 
(2) The notice and supporting evidence given under 
subsection (1) shall be referred to the Board for consideration in 
such manner as the Board determine, and the Board shall advise 
the Minister if grounds exist for granting the licence or for 
varying the decision. 
(3)The Minister may make a decision in relation to a request 
made under this section based upon the findings of the Board. 
 
14. Environment 
and health standards applying to 
water– (1)Environmental standards relating to: 
(a)  the taking of water; and 
(b) any activity that may affect water quality or the 
integrity of a water source, including waste 
management 
operations 
and 
any commercial 
enterprise, – 
maybe prescribed by the Minister, and the Ministry shall be 
responsible for the monitoring and enforcement of the approved 
standards. 
(2) Public health standards relating to the taking of water 
and any aspect of water quality may be prescribed by the 
Minister of Health, and the Ministry of Health shall be 
responsible for the monitoring and enforcement of the approved 
standards. 
(3) Standards imposed under this section may be applied to 
an agency of government whose activities relate to, or impact 
upon the water resource, and to their contractors, and to any 
other persons identified in the applicable standard. 
(4) A person to whom an approved standard applies who 
fails or refuses to comply with the standard commits an offence 
and is liable to a fine not exceeding 20 penalty units. 
(5) In addition to a fine imposed under subsection (4), the 
failure to observe or comply with an approved standard is 
grounds for: 
(a) suspending or revoking any registration, licence or 
permit applying to the person in breach; and 


--- PAGE 15 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
15
(b) refusing a subsequent registration, licence or permit 
sought by the person in breach. 
 
15. Offences against this Part– (1) A person who: 
(a)  gives any false particular in an application made to 
the Ministry for a licence or permit, or any 
registration, under this Part; 
(b) takes water from the water resource of Samoa 
without a licence or permit given under this Part, 
unless exempted by reason of section 12(7); 
(c) fails to comply with conditions imposed in relation 
to a licence given under this Part; 
(d)fails to comply with a requirement of the Samoa 
Water Resource Management Plan applying to 
the taking of water from a water source, – 
commits an offence and upon conviction is liable to a fine not 
exceeding 250 penalty units if the offence is committed by an 
individual person or persons, or 500 penalty units if the offence 
is committed by a company, and to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding 1 year, or to both such a fine and imprisonment. 
 
PART VI 
SAMOA WATER RESOURCES BOARD 
 
16. The Samoa Water Resources Board– (1) The Samoa 
Water Resources Board is established. 
(2) The membership of the Board shall comprise: 
(a)  the Minister, as Chairperson; 
(b)  the Chief Executive Officer; 
(c)  the Chief Executive Officer of the Ministry of 
Finance; 
(d)  the Chief Executive Officer of the Ministry of 
Women and Community Development; 
(e)  the Chief Executive Officer of the Ministry of 
Agriculture; 
(f) the Chief Executive Officer of the Ministry of 
Health; 
(g)  the Commissioner for the Fire and Emergency 
Service; 
(h)  the 
General 
Manager 
of 
the 
Electric Power 
Corporation; 


--- PAGE 16 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
16
(i)  the 
Managing 
Director of the Samoa Water 
Authority; 
(j)  the Chief Executive Officer of an agency in Samoa 
having 
responsibility 
for 
waste 
management     
(if any); 
(k)  the President of the Independent Water Schemes 
Association; 
(l)  the President of the Samoa Umbrella for Non-
Government Organisations (SUNGO), or the 
President’s nominee; and 
(m)  not more than 4 representatives of the community, 
who may be appointed by the Minister for a 
period of up to 3 years. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may appoint officers of the 
Ministry and any other person who may assist in the work of the 
Board, to be advisors to the Board. 
(4) If a member is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, 
an alternate member may be nominated to attend in the place of 
the member. 
(5) Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times and at 
such places as the Minister determines. 
(6) A  meeting of the Board shall be presided over by the 
Minister, and in the absence of the Minister, by the Chief 
Executive Officer. 
(7) The Board may regulate its proceedings in such manner 
as it thinks fit. 
 
17. Functions and Powers of the Board– (1)The functions 
of the Board are to: 
(a)  advise the government on any matter affecting the 
quantity and quality of the water resource; 
(b)  promote 
coordination 
amongst 
government 
agencies having responsibilities relating to the 
water resource; 
(c)  ensure that there is effective monitoring of the 
water resource by the responsible agencies and 
that records of such monitoring are maintained 
and made accessible; 
(d)  promote the dissemination of information about the 
water resource to government agencies and the 
general community; 


--- PAGE 17 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
17
(e) take 
over 
the 
functions 
of 
the 
Watershed 
Management Committee established under the 
Watershed 
Protection 
and 
Management 
Regulations 1992, and ensure that the measures 
provided for in this Act and regulations made 
under 
this 
Act 
relating 
to 
the 
watershed 
management and protection are implemented; 
(f)  recommend to the Minister that an area be declared 
to be a water source protection zone in 
accordance with section 10(1)(f); 
(g)  formulate and endorse a management plan to be 
applied to a designated water source protection 
zone in accordance with section 10(1)(f); 
(h)  arrange 
for 
the 
preparation, endorsement and 
implementation of the Samoa Water Resource 
Management Plan in accordance with Part VII, 
and for its periodic review and amendment; and 
(i)  identify and endorse projects to be undertaken with 
the aim of protecting, conserving and improving 
the water resource. 
(2)All plans endorsed by the Board shall not take effect until 
they are approved by Cabinet. 
 
PART VII 
SAMOA WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
18. Elements of the Samoa Water Resource Management 
Plan– (1) The Samoa Water Resource Management Plan shall 
address the following matters: 
(a)  an inventory of the surface water and groundwater 
resources and water sources; 
(b) an assessment of the available water supply and the 
sources of the water supply; 
(c) a determination of the average quantity of water 
abstracted from water sources on a daily and 
monthly basis; 
(d) a determination of the average quantity of water 
consumed in Samoa (and at certain strategically 
important locations in Samoa) on a daily and 
monthly basis; 


--- PAGE 18 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
18
(e)  a determination, or means of determining, the safe 
yield of water from water sources; 
(f) a determination of the losses of water that occur 
between the source and the consumer; 
(g)  an assessment of environmental flows in specific 
water sources; 
(h) an 
assessment 
of 
water 
waste by domestic, 
commercial, industrial and agricultural users, and 
also by the reticulated water schemes; 
(i) water conservation measures and a timetable for 
their implementation; 
(j) a projection of demand for surface water and 
ground 
water 
by 
domestic, 
commercial, 
industrial and agricultural users; 
(k) mandatory well and intake construction standards, 
including provisions for the sealing and fencing 
of wells; 
(l) a water quality monitoring programme of existing 
and 
proposed 
water 
sources, 
and 
the 
identification of the role in such a programme for 
the responsible government agencies; 
(m) procedures for the recording of information about 
water quality and quantity, for the sharing of it 
amongst the responsible government agencies 
and for its public disclosure; 
(n) contingency plans to be actioned in the event of 
threats to the quantity and quality of the water 
resource; 
(o)  appropriate cost recovery proposals to redress 
problems of salinity, pollution and other adverse 
environment effects that arise from the taking of 
water from the water resource; and 
(p)  the classes of water users and types of water use 
that do not require a licence or permit as 
provided by section 12(7). 
(2) When preparing and approving the Samoa Water 
Resource 
Management 
Plan, 
the Board shall apply the 
following principles: 
(a)  the abstraction of water from surface water sources 
should not exceed the safe yield from those 
sources; 


--- PAGE 19 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
19
(b)  the abstraction of water from a groundwater lens 
should not exceed the safe yield of the lens; 
(c)  wastage of water by a person must be kept to a 
minimum; 
(d)  water use must be beneficial and based on 
principles of sustainability; 
(e)  use of water for human consumption in Samoa is 
the highest priority, and in the case of competing 
uses of the water resource, the needs for such use 
shall prevail; 
(f)  the water resource must be safeguarded from all 
types of pollutants; and 
(g)  conditions may arise when the water resource must 
be safeguarded by the imposition of restrictions 
applying to all or to specific water users. 
(3)The Plan shall be comprised of: 
(a)  all approved government policies relating to water 
resource management and conservation; 
(b)  all technical reports identifying the hydrological, 
meteorological and other matters influencing or 
affecting the water resource; 
(c)  inventories of the water resource; 
(d)  approved strategies and plans for water resource 
conservation and management; and 
(e)  all 
watershed 
management 
plans approved or 
applying under this Act, – 
if such documents are expressed to be part of the Plan and 
approved as such by Cabinet. 
(4) Whilst the Samoa Water Resource Management Plan is 
being formulated or in the event that a matter of significance to 
the proper management of the water resource is not yet part of 
the Plan, the Minister may make Orders in relation to any 
matter referred to in subsection (1), and such Orders are deemed 
to be part of the Plan for all purposes of this Act. 
 
19. Environment Impact Assessments, Planning Schemes 
and other plans to be consistent with the Plan– (1) The 
provisions of the Samoa Water Resource Management Plan 
must be considered and reported upon in relation to all 
assessments of impacts to the environment from proposed 


--- PAGE 20 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
20
developments undertaken under the authority of the Planning 
and Urban Management Act 2004, and any other relevant law. 
(2) All urban and rural planning schemes prepared in 
accordance with any law shall be consistent with the provisions 
of the Samoa Water Resource Management Plan, and all such 
planning schemes shall have the objective of protecting and 
conserving 
the 
water 
resources 
in accordance with the 
objectives stated in section 9. 
(3) No approval may be given under any law dealing with 
development controls and the assessment of impacts on the 
environment if the effect of the approval is to breach a provision 
of the Samoa Water Resource Management Plan. 
(4) The National Disaster Management Plan applied under 
the Disaster and Emergency Management Act 2007 shall make 
appropriate provision in relation to: 
(a)  the protection of Samoa’s water resources from 
events 
that 
may 
constitute 
disaster 
and 
emergency situations; 
(b)  the provision of adequate water during periods of 
disaster and emergency; and 
(c)  rights to access water sources on a temporary basis 
for the purposes of meeting demands and needs 
for 
water 
during 
periods 
of 
disaster 
or 
emergency. 
(5) All plans and licences or other approvals relating to 
forestry 
and 
other 
natural 
resource 
management 
and 
exploitation, and for the management of national parks and 
reserves shall make appropriate provision in relation to the 
protection of Samoa’s water resources from the activities or 
within the areas covered by such plans and approvals. 
 
PART VIII 
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT 
 
20. Interpretation in this Part – In this Part, unless the 
context otherwise requires.  
―customary bodies‖ means: 
(a)  the relevant Village Fono under the Village Fono 
Act 1990; and 


--- PAGE 21 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
21
(b)  the relevant Pulenu’u and the Sui o le Malo 
appointed under the Pulenu’u and Sui o le Malo 
Act 1978; 
―protected watershed‖ means an area designated as a 
protected watershed by a watershed management plan; 
―purpose of watershed protection‖ means the protection of 
the climate, soil conservation, or water conservation and 
storage 
(whether 
for 
water 
supply, 
irrigation, 
or 
generation of electricity); 
―watershed 
management 
plan‖ 
means 
a 
watershed 
management plan approved by the Head of State under 
section 23, subject to any variation made under section 
28. 
 
21.Functions of the Board in relation to watershed 
management – The Board shall: 
(a)  advise the Minister on the need, with respect to a 
watershed, to prepare a watershed management 
plan or to vary any such plan; 
(b)  finalise 
a 
watershed 
management 
plan 
in 
accordance with section 26; 
(c)  ensure that the existence and contents of a 
watershed management plan are made known 
generally to the people residing in, or adjacent to 
the land, the subject of the plan; 
(d)  use its best endeavors to ensure that the contents of 
a watershed management plan are implemented; 
(e)  review, from time to time as appropriate, the 
effectiveness 
of each watershed management 
plan in achieving its purposes of watershed 
protection, and recommend any variation of its 
contents in accordance with section 28; and  
(f)  perform any other functions conferred on it by this 
Act or regulations made under this Act. 
 
22. Powers of the Board in relation to watershed 
management – The Board, in the performance of its functions, 
shall have the power to direct any authorized officer to exercise 
a power provided for in Part X to ensure that proper protection 
and management is given and applied to watershed areas in 
accordance with this Part and regulations made under this Act. 


--- PAGE 22 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
22
 
23. Preparation of a watershed management plan– (1) 
When directed by the Minister with respect to any watershed, 
the 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer 
shall 
cause 
a 
watershed 
management plan to be prepared in accordance with the 
provisions of this Part. 
(2) The purpose of a watershed management plan is to 
provide the framework for rational and effective management of 
the watershed concerned and its resources with a view to: 
(a)  the progressive introduction and application of 
appropriate standards and techniques for the 
protection 
management, 
sustainable 
use 
and 
improvement of the watershed and its resources; 
(b)  the planning and coordination of all Government 
and private activities which have a significant 
effect upon the watershed and its resources; 
(c)  the provision of water from the watershed suitable 
for 
domestic 
purposes, 
the 
generation 
of 
hydroelectricity, industrial and commercial use, 
agriculture, irrigation and the watering of stock, 
fishing, conservation of flora and fauna and 
recreation; 
(d)  the retreatment and proper disposal of waste in the 
watershed; 
(e)  the protection of the watershed from activities 
likely to cause damage to its soil and water; 
(f)  monitoring of soil and water resources and land use 
activities in the watershed; and 
(g)  the 
promotion 
of 
public 
awareness 
of 
and 
commitment to the responsible use of the 
watershed and its water. 
 
24. Contents of plans–(1) A watershed management plan 
shall: 
(a)  describe the location and general physical features 
of the land the subject of the plan; 
(b)  designate closed areas, reserves and buffer zones; 
(c)  describe 
the 
Government 
work 
and 
private 
activities 
currently 
being 
conducted 
in 
the 
watershed, and their effects, both individually 


--- PAGE 23 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
23
and in combination upon the watershed and its 
resources; 
(d)  specify— 
(i)  the 
Government 
work 
which 
it 
is 
planned to carry out in the watershed; and 
(ii)  likely changes in private activities being 
conducted in the watershed, which will have a 
significant effect upon the watershed and its 
resources, 
and 
describe 
those 
effects both 
individually and in combination: 
(e)  specify the prohibitions or restrictions, if any, 
which 
will 
apply 
to 
land 
use 
within 
the 
watershed, including— 
(i) 
the 
prohibition 
or 
regulation 
of an 
agricultural, commercial or development activity 
likely to impact upon the water resource; and 
(ii) 
prohibitions 
or 
restrictions 
on 
the 
removal of trees or other vegetation; 
(f)  specify 
the 
arrangements 
to 
be 
made 
for 
participation by representatives of the people 
residing in or adjacent to the watershed in the 
ongoing management of the watershed including 
by the appointment of advisory Boards;  
(g)  specify the standards and techniques to be used for 
monitoring the watershed and its resources; and 
(h) ensure that the biodiversity within the watershed is 
protected. 
(2) A watershed management plan may contain a map or 
maps to illustrate its contents and scope of application. 
 
25. Process of Plan Preparation– (1) The Chief Executive 
Officer shall first prepare a watershed management plan in draft 
form, and shall then: 
(a)  cause the draft plan to be publicised in such a 
manner as is likely to bring it to the notice of 
people residing in, or adjacent to the watershed; 
(b)  cause consultations on the contents of the draft plan 
to be held with the customary bodies in each 
village located in or adjacent to the watershed; 
(c)  cause meetings to be held to discuss the contents of 
the draft plan with any persons known to be 


--- PAGE 24 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
24
clearing or cultivating any land, or grazing any 
animals, within the watershed; 
(d)  forward a copy of the draft plan to the members of 
the Board; and 
(e)  call for comments from interested members of the 
public on the contents of the draft plan. 
(2) After the Chief Executive Officer has complied with 
subsection (1), and a reasonable time has been allowed for 
public comment, the Minister shall convene a meeting of the 
Board to finalise the watershed management plan for that 
watershed. 
 
26. Finalisation of a watershed management plan–(1) 
Upon presentation of a Plan the Board, shall consider the draft 
watershed management plan and taking due account of the 
results of all consultations and meetings held and any comments 
received shall decide on the final form of the plan and submit it 
to the Minister. 
(2) Upon receiving a finalised management plan the 
Minister shall refer it to Cabinet for its consideration. 
(3) Upon its consideration of a watershed management plan 
Cabinet may advise the Head of State to approve it, or Cabinet 
may refer it back to the Board for reconsideration and revision. 
(4) The Head of State, acting on the advice of Cabinet, may 
by Order approve a watershed management plan. 
 
27. Publication 
of 
a 
plan–(1) 
When 
a 
watershed 
management plan comes into force, the Chief Executive Officer 
shall: 
(a)  forward a copy of the plan to each member of the 
Board; and 
(b)  cause a notice to be published in the Savali, and in a 
newspaper circulating in the area to which the 
notice relates; and  
(c)  cause a notice to be broadcast by radio, advising 
how interested persons may obtain a copy of the 
plan, or may examine the plan. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may require a fee to be 
paid, in the amount fixed by him or her for obtaining a copy of a 
watershed management plan. 
 


--- PAGE 25 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
25
28. Variation of a plan–(1) A watershed management plan 
may be varied in the same manner as is provided for in sections 
23 and 26 for the preparation and finalization of a watershed 
management plan. 
(2) A variation in a watershed management plan shall be 
published in the same manner as is provided for in section 27 
for the publication of a watershed management plan. 
 
29. Reserves 
and 
Closed 
Areas– 
(1)A 
watershed 
management plan may designate water reserve areas or 
easements adjacent to water reserves for the purpose of 
regulating activities within the watershed. 
(2) A watershed management plan may provide for any land 
to be protected land and to be closed for the purpose of 
protecting the water resource in the watershed area. 
(3) The Taking of Land Act 1964 applies to any protected 
lands under subsection (2). 
 
30. Offence to breach a management plan– A person 
who: 
(a)  acts in breach of a restriction of a watershed 
management plan that is in force; or  
(b)  disturbs any soil or vegetation contrary to any order 
made under section 29(2) or the conditions 
applying to a permission under section 29(3), – 
commits an offence, and is liable upon conviction to a fine not 
exceeding 20 penalty units. 
 
31. Responsibilities of officers, etc– (1) Authorised officers 
and all officers of government agencies having roles relating to 
the management of water resources shall take such acts and 
exercise such powers as are necessary to ensure that the 
requirements of a watershed management plan are observed. 
(2) The customary bodies in a village within or adjacent to a 
protected watershed the subject of a watershed management 
plan shall use their best endeavours to ensure that the 
requirement of the plan are observed by the residents of that 
village. 
(3) When an offence is committed in a protected watershed 
or in respect of any water in or from a protected watershed, an 
information for the prosecution of that offence shall be 


--- PAGE 26 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
26
promptly laid by an officer designated by the Chief Executive 
Officer. 
 
32. Powers of Government agencies etc– (1) For the 
purposes of implementing a watershed management plan, 
government agencies may carry out work on any land in a 
protected watershed for the purpose of soil conservation, or for 
protection of the water catchments area. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer, for the purposes of 
implementing a watershed management plan, may close a road 
on or through government land to public access, either 
temporarily or permanently, by the erection of a gate or by any 
other suitable means. 
(3) A road shall not be closed under this section if to do so 
would deny any reasonable access to the beneficial owners of 
any customary land, freehold land, or current leases over 
government land. 
 
PART IX 
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT 
IN WATER MANAGEMENT 
 
33. Village and community by-laws–(1)The Ministry may 
consult with village and community representatives, and prepare 
and promulgate by-laws not inconsistent with this Act for the 
conservation and management of water resource in particular 
areas and which involve local communities in conservation and 
management measures, including requirements or restrictions 
relating to: 
(a)  the taking of any water from a particular water 
source; 
(b)  sanitation practices and facilities to protect a water 
source; 
(c)  the use of detergents, pesticides and other substances 
which may adversely affect a water source; 
(d)  the grazing of cattle and the keeping of other animals 
which may impact on a water source; 
(e)  the use of lands near a water source for purposes of 
recreation; 
(f)  the removal and disposal of wastes from areas near a 
water source; 


--- PAGE 27 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
27
(g)  activities which adversely affect river banks, river 
beds or any other feature of a water source; and 
(h)  any other activity or practice which may adversely 
affect a water source in the area to which the by-
law shall apply. 
(2) Any by-laws made under this section must: 
(a)  be signed by the Chief Executive Officer; 
(b)  be published in the Savali; and 
(c)  come into force on the date of publication in the 
Savali, or on a day fixed in the by-law. 
(3) Any by-laws made under this section may be altered or 
revoked in the same manner in which it may be made under this 
section. 
(4) Any draft by-laws affecting or applying to the 
conservation and management of water resources shall be 
provided to the Pulenuu of adjacent villages during the period of 
consultation leading to the preparation of the by-laws. 
(5) A final copy of each draft by-laws shall be provided to the 
Pulenuu of adjacent villages at least 7 clear days before it is 
published in the Savali. 
(6) By-laws may provide that any matter is to be determined, 
applied, dispensed with, prohibited or regulated by the Chief 
Executive Officer, any such power may be exercised either 
generally or for any classes of cases, or in a particular case. 
(7) No by-laws made under this section shall bind the 
Government. 
(8) All by-laws must impose only reasonable restrictions and 
requirements and must be consistent with this Act, the Samoa 
Water Resource Management Plan and all approved policies and 
schemes applying to the water resource. 
 
34. Other community based programs and initiatives– 
(1) The Ministry may devise, approve, implement or participate 
in programs relating to water conservation and the promotion of 
proper water management practices in Samoa. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the Ministry may act in 
combination or association with any other person or body, 
whether incorporated or not, and whether in Samoa or elsewhere, 
for a purpose associated with water conservation and water 
resource management. 


--- PAGE 28 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
28
(3) The Minister may convene and conduct a National Water 
Forum to involve village and community representatives in the 
effective management of the water resource and to report on the 
current state of the water resource. 
 
PART X 
POWERS TO MONITOR AND ENFORCE 
 
35. Appointment of authorised officers–(1)Despite the 
provisions of any other Act, the Chief Executive Officer may 
appoint an officer or employee of the Ministry to: 
(a)  be an authorised officer for the purposes of this Act 
or a regulation made under it; and 
(b)  perform the function of an authorised officer, 
inspector, 
analyst, 
by-laws 
officer or other 
officer 
necessary 
to 
perform 
any 
functions 
related to the conservation and management of 
Samoa’s water resources. 
(2) An officer or employee appointed under subsection (1) 
shall have the right to exercise any power: 
(a)  given to an officer under any Act identified by the 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer 
in 
the 
notice 
of 
appointment applying to the officer; and 
(b) any power stated in section 36. 
 
36. Powers of authorised officers–(1) In addition to 
powers conferred by this or any other law, authorised officers 
shall have power, on producing (if so required) evidence of 
appointment under this Act, to enter or access at any time any 
land, water source, premises, vessel, ship, aircraft, vehicle or 
other conveyance for the purpose of: 
(a)  monitoring the impact on the water resource of an 
activity, matter or thing; 
(b)  investigating the commission of an offence or the 
breach of a lawful obligation under a law relating 
to the conservation and management of the water 
resource; 
(c)  serving and enforcing any notice under section 
10(1)(h) requiring that an activity cease or that a 
structure be removed; 


--- PAGE 29 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
29
(d)  otherwise enforcing this Act and any regulations 
made under this Act: 
PROVIDED THAT no authorised officer shall enter a 
dwelling-house unless authorised to do so by a warrant issued 
by a Judge, who shall not grant the warrant unless satisfied that 
the officer has reasonable grounds for requiring entry to the 
premises. 
(2) In the exercise of the powers conferred by subsection 
(1), an authorised officer may: 
(a)  conduct such investigations and examinations as are 
necessary to monitor the effects of any activity, 
matter or thing, or to determine whether an 
offence or breach of a lawful obligation has been 
committed; 
(b)  install, 
operate 
and 
maintain 
hydrological 
and 
related equipment and instruments, and water 
measuring sites and gauging stations, in all water 
sources and on all government land, and on 
private lands with the consent of the owner of the 
land; 
(c)  erect public notice boards and information or 
warning signs at any water source and on any 
government land, and on private land with the 
consent of the owner of the land; 
(d)  take samples for the purpose of analysis and testing; 
(e)  take photographs or measurements; 
(f)  require a person apparently associated with an 
activity under investigation to state his or her full 
name, occupation and usual place of residence;  
(g)  require the production of a document relevant to the 
activity, 
matter or thing under investigation, 
including a licence or permit required by law; 
(h)  require from a person any assistance that is relevant 
to the investigation or monitoring activity; and 
(i)  seize any item used in the commission of an offence 
against this Act or any law relating to the 
conservation and management of the water 
resource. 
(3) A person commits an offence who: 
(a)  hinders or obstructs an authorised officer in the 
performance of his or her duties, or the exercise 


--- PAGE 30 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
30
of a power, under this Act or any other law 
related to the conservation and management of 
the water resource; 
(b)  induces or incites any other person to hinder or 
obstruct an authorised officer; 
(c)  by words or conduct falsely represents that he or 
she 
is 
an 
authorised officer, or otherwise 
impersonates an authorised officer; 
(d)  fails to comply with a requirement made by an 
authorised officer under subsection (2)(d)(e) or 
(f); 
(e)  provides false or misleading information to an 
authorised 
officer 
when 
required 
under 
subsection (2) to provide information; 
(f)  removes, tampers with or damages any equipment, 
notice board or sign installed or erected pursuant 
to subsection (2); or 
(g)  removes, tampers with or damages any equipment 
being used for the purpose of gathering or 
recording any information or data concerning the 
water resource installed or operated by a person 
in accordance with an obligation to provide 
information to the Ministry under this Act, – 
and is liable upon conviction to a fine not exceeding 20 penalty 
units, for an individual, or to a fine of 40 penalty units for a 
corporation, or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 3 
months, or both. 
 
37. Precautionary Notice– (1) Where an authorised officer 
suspects that an activity of a licence or permit holder under this 
Act, or a person undertaking activities which affect the water 
resource, may: 
(a)  be in breach of— 
(i)  a requirement applying under this Act or 
regulations made under this Act; or 
(ii)  any 
environmental 
or 
development 
control affecting the activity and related to the 
water resource; 
(b)  be adversely impacting upon water resources in any 
way; or 


--- PAGE 31 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
31
(c)  cause disaffection amongst land owners or a village 
or community being affected by a water taking 
operation or activity, – 
the officer may issue a notice requiring that a person apparently 
in control of or associated with the activity, matter or thing 
comply with a requirement specified in subsection (2). 
(2) A notice issued under subsection (1) may require all or 
any of the following: 
(a)  that information be provided in relation to the 
operation or activity to satisfy the Assistant 
Chief Executive Officer – Water Resource of the 
Ministry that no such breach, adverse impact, 
risk of disaffection or threat to the water resource 
is occurring, or likely to occur; 
(b)  that alternative operating techniques or activities be 
considered and employed to avoid the breach or 
decrease the adverse impact, risk of disaffection 
or threat to the water resource; 
(c)  that improvements or alterations be made in relation 
to the operation or activity to the satisfaction of 
the Assistant Chief Executive Officer – Water 
Resources of the Ministry, to avoid the breach or 
decrease the adverse impact, risk of disaffection 
or threat to the resource; and 
(d)  any other requirement, as determined by the 
Assistant 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer 
– 
Water 
Resources 
of 
the 
Ministry, 
to 
ensure 
due 
compliance 
with 
any 
requirement, 
avoid 
the 
adverse impact, disaffection or threat of damage to 
the water resource. 
(3) A person served with a notice under this section shall 
ensure that the requirements stated in the notice are complied 
with within the time stipulated, and shall satisfy the Assistant 
Chief Executive Officer – Water Resources of the Ministry, 
prior to the expiration of that time, that the activity, matter or 
thing is not adversely affecting the water resource. 
 
38. Notice to cease an activity–(1)A Notice may be issued 
under this section whether or not a Precautionary Notice has 
been served under section 37. 


--- PAGE 32 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
32
(2) If, after receiving advice from the Chief Executive 
Officer, the Minister is of the opinion that there is occurring, or 
may occur, an act or activity which involves a breach of a 
requirement or an immediate risk of disaffection or threat to the 
water resource as provided for in section 37(1), the Minister 
may issue a Notice under this section. 
(3) A Notice issued under this section shall: 
(a)  be directed to the licence or permit holder, or a 
person believed to be carrying out the operation 
or activity, or apparently has some control over 
it; 
(b)  specify an act or activity which warrants the issue 
of the notice; and 
(c)  require that the act or activity cease, or not be done, 
until the Minister is satisfied that the breach, the 
risk of disaffection or threat to the resource no 
longer exists. 
(4) A Notice may be served under this section despite that 
any approval, licence or permit has been granted in relation to 
the operation or activity. 
(5) The Minister and the Government is not liable in respect 
of any loss or damage arising from, or in any way connected 
with, the issuing of a Notice under this section. 
 
39. Offences and penalties related to notices– (1) A 
person who, having been served with a Notice issued pursuant 
to section 37, fails to comply with a requirement stated in the 
Notice commits an offence, and is liable upon conviction to a 
fine not exceeding 100 penalty units, or to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding 1 year, or both. 
(2) A person commits an offence who: 
(a)  having been served with a Notice issued under 
section 38, fails to comply with any of its terms; 
(b)  having been served with a Notice issued under 
section 38, causes or permits any other person to 
act in breach of its requirements; or 
(c)  knowingly acts in breach of the requirements of a 
Notice given under section 38, whether or not 
that person has been served with the Notice, 


--- PAGE 33 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
33
and is liable upon conviction to a fine not exceeding 100 
penalty units, or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 
6months, or both. 
(3) In addition to any other penalty imposed under this 
section, a court may order that a person convicted of an offence 
pay compensation for any resulting loss or damage to the 
Government, or to any other person affected by the offence. 
 
40. Prosecution of offences– (1) The Chief Executive 
Officer and any authorised officer may commence and conduct 
a prosecution in relation to an offence committed against this 
Act or any other law relating to the conservation and protection 
of the water resource. 
(2) With the approval of the Attorney General, the Chief 
Executive Officer may authorise that a prosecution under this 
Act be conducted by a duly qualified lawyer. 
(3) If a corporation is guilty of an offence under this Act, or 
any Regulation made under it, an officer, director or agent of 
the corporation who authorised, assented to or participated in 
the commission of the offence, or who by his or  
her neglect or omission contributed to the commission of the 
offence, shall be a party to the offence and may be found guilty 
in relation to its commission, and shall be liable to penalty 
provided for in relation to it. 
 
41. Requirement to provide information, data etc–(1) All 
holders of licences and permits granted under this Act, and all 
persons conducting an operation, business or activity which 
involves use of the water resource, or which causes an adverse 
impact on the water resource must: 
(a)  keep all such records and data in relation to the 
water 
resource 
which 
the 
Chief 
Executive 
Officers requires to be recorded and kept; 
(b)  provide all information, statistics and copies of 
records relating to any such operation or activity 
that is required to be provided by the Chief 
Executive Officer; and 
(c)  file any returns required by the Chief Executive 
Officer giving accurate information concerning 
any water resource related matter required to be 
provided in the returns. 


--- PAGE 34 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
34
(2) When providing any information or filing any return 
under subsection (1) the provider of the information or return 
may indicate that certain information is of a confidential nature, 
if it is information that should not be available to commercial 
competitors of that person. 
(3) If the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that the nature 
of the information justifies it being kept confidential, the 
information may only be provided to government officials 
performing official duties in relation to Samoa’s water resource. 
(4) No person to whom the information has been provided 
under subsection (2) may disclose it to a person who is not 
authorised by the Chief Executive Officer to receive the 
information, and it may not be used for any commercial purpose 
within Samoa, except with the written consent of the person 
providing the information or return. 
(5) If the Chief Executive Officer is not satisfied that the 
nature of the information justifies it being kept confidential: 
(a)  the person providing the information or return shall 
be advised of the Chief Executive Officer’s 
decision; 
(b)  reasons for the decision shall be provided upon 
request 
from 
the 
person 
providing 
the 
information or return, or a person authorised by 
that person; 
(c)  the Chief Executive Officer must consult with the 
person if requested; and 
(d)  the decision may be reviewed by the Minister. 
 
PART XI 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
42. General offences– A person commits an offence who: 
(a)  discharges a pollutant into the water resource of 
Samoa; 
(b)  causes, suffers or permits any pollutant to be 
discharged into the water resource of Samoa; 
(c)  does any act which is inconsistent with a provision 
of an approved management plan applying to a 
water source protection zone, – 
and upon conviction is liable to a fine not exceeding 250 
penalty units if the offence is committed by an individual 


--- PAGE 35 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
35
person or persons, or 500 penalty units if the offence is 
committed by a company, and to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding 1 year, or to both such a fine and imprisonment. 
 
43.Fees –The Minister may by Order set fees for any 
purpose associated with this Act including: 
(a)  application fees;  
(b)  licence fees;  
(c)  abstraction fees based on the duration of the licence 
or the quantity of water taken (or both);and 
(d)  special fees and levies to address salinity and other 
adverse environmental effects, or to discourage 
or penalise water wastage. 
 
44. Protection of persons performing duties under this 
Act– A person who lawfully exercises a power or performs a 
function under the authority of this Act is not be liable for any 
loss or damage, or be subject to any criminal prosecution, in 
relation to the reasonable exercise of that power or the 
performance of that function. 
 
45. Regulations– (1) The Head of State, acting on the 
advice of Cabinet, is empowered to make Regulations for the 
effective 
implementation 
of this Act and the protection, 
conservation and proper management of the water resource in 
Samoa. 
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), regulations may be 
made which: 
(a)  provide for additional functions and powers of the 
Samoa Water Resources Board; 
(b)  facilitate the exercise of a power of the Minister 
under this Act; 
(c)  prescribe the classes of licences and permits and the 
rights conferred by each class; 
(d) provide 
for 
the 
preparation, 
endorsement, 
implementation and enforcement of the Water 
Resource 
Management 
Plan, 
and 
the 
involvement of the community in aspects of the 
planning process; 
(e)  declare areas adjacent to water sources to be water 
reserves or easements, and provide for the 


--- PAGE 36 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
36
powers and restrictions which may be applied to 
water reserves;  
(f)  provide for all aspects of irrigation schemes, 
including any rights and obligations of irrigators 
under such schemes, and any controls and 
restrictions on the use of water for irrigation 
purposes; 
(g)  drought 
response 
measures, 
including 
the 
imposition of schemes— 
(i)  of water restrictions throughout Samoa 
or in zones or areas; and 
(ii)  for the prioritisation of the use of water 
during times of low rainfall or water availability; 
(h)  facilitate the making, application and enforcement 
of by-laws made under section 33; 
(i)  facilitate the formulation or implementation of a 
programme relating to water conservation or 
water resource management under section 21, or 
the 
participation 
by 
government 
or 
the 
community in any such program; and 
(j) provide for the powers and functions of Independent 
Water Schemes and for the registration and 
regulation of Independent Water Schemes. 
(3) The regulations made under this section may prescribe 
offences and impose penalties being fines not exceeding 100 
penalty units or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 1 year, 
or both such fine and imprisonment. 
 
46. Emergency Regulations–(1)If a situation arises that in 
the opinion of the Minister poses a threat or risk to the water 
resource that requires the immediate making of Regulations in 
order to protect any part of the water resource of Samoa, the 
Minister may make Emergency Regulations in accordance with 
this section. 
(2)Regulations made under this section: 
(a)  shall be consistent with section 44; 
(b)  shall take effect immediately upon its making by 
the Minister; 
(c)  shall be referred to the Cabinet for ratification as 
soon as is practicable; and 


--- PAGE 37 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
37
(d)  shall continue to have full force and effect unless 
ratification by Cabinet is declined. 
 
47. Savings provisions –All watershed areas and watershed 
management plans approved under the Watershed Protection 
and Management Regulations 1992, and current as at the 
commencement of this Act, are saved and are deemed to have 
been declared and made under the provisions of this Act. 
 
48. Repeals and consequential amendments– (1) The 
Water Act 1965 is repealed. 
(2) Section 35 of the Lands, Survey and Environment Act 
1989 is amended by deleting the words ―water rights‖ where 
ever they appear. 
(3) The Watershed Protection and Management Regulations 
1992 are repealed. 
 
______________ 
 
REVISION NOTES 2008– 2012 
 
This Act repeals the Water Act 1965 and has been revised under section 5 of 
the Revision and Publication of Laws Act 2008.  
 
The following general revisions have been made: 
(a) 
 Amendments have been made to conform to modern drafting styles 
and to use modern language as applied in the laws of Samoa. 
(b) 
Insertion of the commencement date 
(c) 
References to the male gender made gender neutral 
(d) 
Other minor editing has been done in accordance with the lawful 
powers of the Attorney General, where appropriate: 
(i) 
―Every‖ and ―any‖ changed to ―a/an‖  
(ii) 
Present tense drafting style: 
o 
―shall be‖ changed to ―is/are‖  
o 
―shall have‖ changed to ―has‖ 
o 
―from time to time‖ removed  
(iii) 
Removal/replacement of obsolete and archaic terms with 
plain language 
o 
―notwithstanding‖ changed to ―despite‖ 
o 
―where‖ changed to ―if‖  
o 
―in the case of‖ changed to ―for‖ 
(iv) 
Numbers in words changed to figures 
 
There were no amendments made to this Act since its enactment. 
 


--- PAGE 38 ---

Water Resources Management Act 2008 
38
This Act has been revised in 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 by the 
Attorney General under the authority of the Revision and Publication of 
Laws Act 2008 and is the official version of this Act as at 31 December 
2012.  It is an offence to publish this Act without approval or to make any 
unauthorised change to an electronic version of this Act. 
 
 
 
Aumua Ming Leung Wai 
Attorney General of Samoa 
 
Revised in 2008 by the Legislative Drafting Division under the supervision 
of Teleiai Lalotoa Sinaalamaimaleula Mulitalo (Parliamentary Counsel). 
 
Revised in 2009, 2010 and 2011 by the Legislative Drafting Division under 
the supervision of Papalii Malietau Malietoa (Parliamentary Counsel). 
 
Revised in 2012 by the Legislative Drafting Division. 
 
 
 
The Water Resources Management Act 2008 is administered by the 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
