

--- PAGE 1 ---

1
fg~~ -j(J- j (J
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRIC
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE
STAATSKOERANT
VAN DIE REPUBLIEK VAN SUID-AFRIKA
CAPE TOWN, 26 AUGUST 1998
vol. 398
No. 19182
KAAPSTAD, 26 AUGUSTUS 1998
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
N(). 1091.
26 August 1998
It is hereby notified (hat the President has assented
to the following Act which is hereby published for general
inlormation-
No. 36 of’ 1998: National Water Act, 1998.
KANT()()R  VAN DIE PR[iSII)[;NT
N(). 1091.
~(, ALlg,]\(Ll\  lot)~
Hicrby 
w o r d  bckend gcnl:iak d;lt die Prc\idcnt \y
goedkmring geheg Iwt MI] die (mdel-st;i:lndc  Wet v:it I]icrhy
[m algenmnc inligting gcpuhliwx! m tml:--
No. 36 van 199X: Nusitmitlc Watcrwct. 199X,


--- PAGE 2 ---

2
N(I 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 19°8
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
ACT
10 provide for fundamental reform of the law relating to water resources; to repeal
certain laws; and to provide for matters connected therewith.
PREAMBLE
Recognizing that water is a scarce and unevenly distributed national resource which
occurs in many different forms which are all part of a unitary, inter-dependent cycle;
Recognizing that while water is a natural resource that belongs to all people, the
discriminatory laws and practices of the past have prevented equal access to water, and
use of water resources;
Acknowledging the National Government’s overall responsibility for and authority
over the nation’s water resources and their use, including the equitable allocation of
wtiter for beneficial use, [he redistribution of water, and international water matters;
Recognizing that the ultimate aim of water resource management is to achieve the
sust~inable use of water for the benefit of all users;
Recognizing that the protection of the quality of water resources is necessary to
ensure sustainability of the ntition’s water resources in the interests of all water users;
and
Recognizing the need for the integrated management of all aspects of water resources
and, where appropriate, the delegation of management functions to a regional or
catchrnent level so as to enable everyone to participate;
(English text signed by the President. )
(Assented to 20 August 1998.)
B
E IT ENACTED by the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, as
follows:-
INDEX
CHAPTER 1: INTERPRETATION AND FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
1.
?
i:
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9,
1 ().
Il.
Definitions and interpretation
5
Purpose of Act
Public trusteeship of nation’s water resources
Entitlement to wtiter use
CHAPTER 2: WArER  MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
Part 1: National water resource strategy
Establishment of national water resource strategy
Contents of national water resource strategy
Giving etfect to national water resource strategy
Part 2: Catchment management strategies
Esttiblishmen[ of catchment management strategies
Contents of catchment management stmtegy
Guidelines for and consultation on catchrnent management strategies
Giving effect to catchment  management strategies
lo
15


--- PAGE 3 ---

-1
N(), 1’)182
GOVERNMENT GAZ[:’H E. 26 AUGUST 1°9X
,Act No. .36, 1998
NATIONAL, WATER ACT. 199X
Purt 1: Chrssijication systent for water resources
I 2. Prescriptitm of clwitication system
Purt 2: Class@ cation of water resources and resource quality objectives
I 3. Determination of class 01 wukr resources and resource quality objccti\es  5
14. Preliminary dctcrtnination of class or resource quulity objectives
i 5, Giving cticct (0 dctcrnlinMion of class of water resource and resource quaiily
objectives
Part 3: The Reserve
16. Determination of Reserve
17. Preliminary determinations of Reserve
18. Giving ctlecl to Reserve
Part 4: Pollution prevention
19. Prevention and remedying effects of pollution
Part .5: Emergency iucidents
1()
15
Z(), control  of emergency incidents
CHAPTER 4: USE OF WATER
Part 1: General principles
2 I. Water use
22. Permissible wuter use
Z()
’23. Determination of qu:mtity of w~tcr which tntiy be allocuted by resp(msible
authority
24. Licenccs tor use of w~[er found underground (m pr(~per{y ot mmlher person
~~. Tr~lnsfcr of w;ltcr usc ilLllllorlSLl(i  ollS”
26. Rcgulutions on (Im usc of wuter
25
Part 2: C(~tl.siderilti[jtls, conditions and essential requiretnents  of general
authorisations and licences
27, consid~r~l[i~)ns  fc)r issue of gcncr:d au[horisu[ions find Iicenccs
28. Essential requirements of Iicences
~(). Conditions for issue of’ generat uulhorisa(ions and }icences
30, Security by applic:mt
3 I. Issuc 0[ Iicencc no guarantee of supply
I’art 3: Existing la wfhl water uses
32. [ktinition  of existing lawful water use
33. l>ecldr~ili(m ot” wdlcr usc 0s e x i s t i n g  Iilwtul wotet- LISe
34, Authority t[) continue with existing lawful water use
35. Vcrilico(icJn of existing wutcr uses
Part 4: stream Jht w reduction activities
.30
35
36. Dccl:lrali[)n 01 slrctim ll(~w reduction activities
Part 5: Controlled activities
37. C’onlrolltxl aclivity
‘N)


--- PAGE 4 ---

(?
N,) l~)1N2
(government GAZETTE, 26 AIIGLIST  1998
—.
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT. 199X
II&clmition of cetlain uclivilies as controlled activities
Part 6: General authorisatiotts
39, Gcnertii uu(horisations to use wuter
Part 7: Individual applications for licences
40. Applictition lor liccncc
4 I. Procedure for Iicence tipplicutions
42, Reasons for decisions
Part 8: Compulsory licences for water use in respect of specijic resource
5
43.
44,
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
Compulsory Iicence applications
Late applications
Proposed allocation schedules
Preliminary allocation schedule
Final allocution schedules
Licences rcpltice previous entitlements
Part 9: Review and renewal of licences, and amendment and
substitution of conditions of licences
Review and amendment of licences
Format amendment of Iicences
Successors-itl-title
Procedure for edrlier renewal or amendment 01 licences
Part 10: Contravention of or failure to comply with authorisations
Rectification of contravention
Suspension or wilhcirawal of entitlements to use water
Surrender of Iicence
CHAPTER 5: FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Part 1: Water use charges
Pricing strategy i’~}r wti[er use charges
Application 01 pricing strutegy
Recovery of water use charges
Liability tor water usc charges
Water use cborges are charges on land
Part 2: Financial assistance
Financial assistance by Minister
Regulations on tinancial assistance
lo
30
CHAPTER 6: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF MINISTER
35
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
AND DIRECTOR-GENERAL
Part 1: Delegation, directives, expropriation, condonation and
additional powers
Eklegiition 01 powers and duties by Minister
Expropri:Kion  of property
Expropriation for rehabilitation and other’ remedial work
Condonation of ftiilure to comply with time period
Dispensing with certain requirements of Act
Intel-vcntion in litigation
40


--- PAGE 5 ---

88
.\!) 1)1s?
(io\I. I<, xLII.N I (;.lzl.[rk 3, .AIK;I SI IWN
\cl \ll. 3(1, 1998
N YI lo N,\l. \\’,Al I.R A(’1, lLJ~)S
()’).
70,
71.
72.
73.
1-1.
75,
70.
(’HAIYI’IR  7: CATCHhll{NT  NIANA(;ENIENT AGENCIES
Part I: Estaltlishmetlt {Ittd po wers of catch mettt management agencies
77,
78.
7’),
X().
xl,
82.
83.
M.
85.
86,
Part -/: liltk’t.l’(’tlti(~il, {li.ve.Yt[lh[i.vll ttteflt or chttnge of nwter munagettt t)nt
87.
88.
89,
90,
91.
~)?,
93.
94.
95,
9(>
07,
~)x.
~)~)
10
-H)
45


--- PAGE 6 ---

Ill
N(I. l~Jl X2
GOVE LNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUG[JST  1998
Act No.  36, 1998
NATIONAI. WATEF ACT. 1998
I 00.
101.
102.
103.
1 (M.
105.
I 06.
107.
108.
109.
I 10.
Ill.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
I 20,
121.
122.
123.
124.
125.
126.
127.
128.
129.
130.
131
I 32
133
134
135
I 36
Rcgufatior?s regarding irdvisory committees
Transiti(mal provisions relating to advisory C( mrnittees
CHAPTER 10: lNTL?RNAIIONAI.  WATE 1 MANAGEMENT
Establishment of’ bodies to implement interna ional agreements
Governance and functions of bodies
Powers of bodies
Bodies must manage different functions as se] ~arate units
Reports on performance of’ functions
Investigation of affairs or financial position 01 bodies
Transitional provisions relating to existing bo lies
CHAPTER 11: GOVERNMENT WA IIERWORKS
Acquisition, construction, alteration, repair, 01 ,eration and control of govern-
ment waterworks
Comsultati(m  and environmental impact asses$ ment
Financing of government waterworks
Water from government waterworks
Access to and use of government waterworks for recreiitional purposes
Government waterworks constructed before c )mmencernent of Act
Disposal of government waterworks
Regulations regarding government waterwork i
CHAPTER 12: SAFETY OF I )AMS
Definitions
Control measures for dam with safety risk
Responsibilities of approved professional pers w?s
Registration of dam with safety risk
25
Factors to be considered in declilring diim or ca .egory of dams with safety risk
Exemptions
Regulations regarding dilm safety
C H A P T E R  13: Acc13ss TO AND RIGkI rs O V E R  L A N D
Part I: Entry and inspectit n
Appointment of authorised persons
Powers and duties of authorised persons
Part 2: Servitudes
Definitions
Acquisition of servitudes
35
Rights and duties of servitude holders i~nd Ian{ Iowners
Procedure for acquisition and amendment ofs :rvitudes
Powers of High Court in respect of Cli]im for : ervitude
Compensation payable for granting of servituc es
Noting of servitude and amendment by endors ment against title deed
40
Cancellation of servitude
Joint wtiterwork involving servitude
Part 3: Waterworks and personals ?rvitudes
Ownership of’ waterworks on land belonging t{) another
Trimsfer of personid  servitudes
5
I ()
Is
20
30
45


--- PAGE 7 ---

,1(4 No. 36, I 998
(;OVI RNM[:N’I  GAZETTF..  26 ALIG[lST  1~)~)~
N,\llo NAl,  W,NW : A(’”1.  199X
CHAPTER 14: MONIrlORIN(;,  ASSESSMEN  r AND INFORMATION”
137
I 38
139
140
141
I ~~
I 43
144,
145
146
147,
148.
I 49.
[ 50.
151.
152.
153,
I 54.
155,
1s5.
157.
158,
159,
i 60.
161.
162.
163.
164.
l’art I: National monitoring s vstems
tls[ahlishmcn[ of na[ioniil nl(mit(~riilg system
Establishment of mechanisms to cn-ordina(e  monitoring of water Ircsourcw
[’art 2: National injbrmation systems ot, water resources
Estabiishmcnl  of niilional information systcn s
objectives of nalirmal information systems
Provision 0[ inf(wrnation
Access to information
Regu]n[ions  for monitoring, :issessment and i lforrnation
Part 3: Information on bloodlines, Jloot k and droughts
Fl(xdlincs  tm plans I[}r c\tablishnlent 01 townships
Duty to make inl’(mnati(m :Ivoil:ible to public
CHAPTER 15: A1’PEAI.S  AND DISPU’1  E RI? SOI,U”[ION
Establishment of Water Tribunal
Opcration ()( Water Tribunal
Appeals to Water Tribunal
Appeals from decision~ of” Water Tribunal
Mcdia(i(m
CHAPTER 16: OFFENCES AND ‘< EMEDIES
Otl’ences
Enquiry in respecl {)t’ compenw[i(m  I’or barn) loss or damage suffered
Award (JI dam:iges
otl’cnces in reliition to employer and employt e relationships
Interdict or other (waler by High Court
CHAPTER 17: (; ENERAL  AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS”
Part I: I.iahility
State bound
Lilllilati(m of liability
Amendment or substitution of instruments
Effect (it’ delegation
Part 2: Powers and authoris~  tions
Documents deemed to be properly authorised and issued
Documents and steps valid under certain circumstances
Ser\ice  of documents
Repeal of laws, and savings
Short title and commencement
10
30
35
SCHEDULES
1
2
3
4
PERMISSIBLE USE OF WATER
PROCEDURAL MATTERS REGARDIN{ SERVITUDES
40
POWERS WHICH MAY BE EXERCISED AND DUTIES TO BE
PERFORRIED  BY CATCHMENT  MANI iGEMENT  AGENCIES ON
ASSIGNNIENT OR DIiLEGArlON
hlANA(;EhlENT AND PI. ANNING OF WArER  NIANAGEMENT
INSTITUI1ONS
45


--- PAGE 8 ---

14
N() 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36,  1998
NATIONAL WATt31  ACT, 1998
5 MODEL CONSTITUTION OF WATER U $ER ASSOCIATION
6 WATER TRIBUNAL
7 ACTS REPEALED
CHAPTER 1
INTERPRETATION AND FUNDAMEN
; ‘AL PRINCIPLES
This Chapter sets out the fundamental principles of th, Act. Sustainability and equity
are identl~ed as central guiding principles in the motection, use, development,
conservation, managetnent and control of water resources. These guiding principles
recognise the basic human needs of present and fu ‘ure generations, the need to
protect water resources, the need to share some water J esources  with other countries,
the need to promote social and economic developmetu  through the use of water and
the need to establish suitable institutions in order to a thieve the purpose of the Act.
National Government, acting through the Minister, is r xponsiblefor  the achievement
of these fundamental prz”nciples  in accordance with t~ ~e Constitutional mandate for
water reform. Being empowered to act on behalf of th e nation, the Minister has the
ultimate responsibility to fuljil certain obligations rela !ing to the use, allocation and
protection of and access to water resources.
This Chapter also contains de~nitions explaining he meaning of certain words
used in the Act as well as provisions regarding the int ‘rpretation of the Act.
Definitions and interpretation
1. ( 1 ) In this Act, unless the context shows that anotter  meaning is intended—
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)
(xiii)
(xiv)
“aquifer” means a geological formation whicn has struc~ures or textures that
hold water or permit appreciable water move]nent through them;
“borehole”  includes a well, excavation or my artificially constructed or
improved underground cavity which can be u ;ed for the purpose of—
(a) intercepting, collecting or storing water in or removing water from an
aquifer;
(b) observing and collecting data and inform ]tion on water in an aquifer; or
(c) recharging an aquifer;
“catchment”,
in relalion to a watercourse or watercourses or part of a
watercourse, means the area from which al y rainfall will drain into the
watercourse or watercourses or part of a water :ourse, through surface flow to
a common point or common points;
“charge” includes a fee, price or tariff impost d under this Act;
“conservation” in relation to a water resoun e means the efficient use and
saving of water, achieved through measures such as water saving devices,
water-efficient processes, water demand management and water rationing;
“Department” means the Department of Watt r Affairs and Forestry;
“Director-General” means the Director-Genel  al of the Department;
“entitlement” means a right to use water in terms of any provision of this Act
or in terms of an instrument issued under this Act;
“estuary” means a partially or fully enclosed body of water—
(a) which is open to the sea permanently or ~eriodically; and
(h) within which the sea water can be diluted, to an extent that is measurable,
with fresh water dmined from land;
“government waterwork” means a waterwork owned or controlled by the
Minister and includes the land on which it is : ituated;
“instream habitat” includes the physical stru(ture of a watercourse ond the
associated vegetation in relation to the bed of the watercourse;
“Minister” means the Minister of W~ter Affairs and Forestry:
“organ of state” has the meaning set out in se ;tion 239 of the Constitution;
“person” includes a natural person, a juristic p :rson, an unincorporated body,
an association, an organ of state and the Mini! ter;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 9 ---

16
N() l~JIX?
(; OVEII  NMENT [; AZE:[”lE;,  26 AUGUST 1998
,ict N(). 36.1998
NATIONAI. WATER %( ’T. 1998
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)
(xviii)
(xix)
(xx)
(xxi)
(xxii)
(xxiii)
(xxiv)
(xxv)
“pollution” means the Llircct or indirect alterati m of the physical, chemical or
biological” properties of a water resource so as to make it—
~css l;t [;)r any trcnclicial purpost l~)r which it may reasonably be
expected to bc used: (w
harmful or Potcnliallv harmfu-
(fi~{) to the weltare. health (w safc[y of hu nan beings;
(Ml) to any aquatic or non-aquatic organi ,ms;
(<() [o the resourm quality: or
(old) to property;
“prescribe” means prescribe by regulation:
“protcc[ion”,  in relation to a water resource, ].lean-
(CJ) maintenance ol the quality of (he water I esource to the extent that the
water  resource may be USCLI in an ccologi ally sustainable way;
(/)) prevcnti(m of (he degradali(m 01 the wale rcsouru:  and
([) the rehabilitation of the water resource;
“Reserve” means (Iw quantity anLI quality of\ /ater requirecl-
(fl) to satisfy basic butrlan needs by secur ng J basic water supply, as
prescribed umlcr tbc Water Ser\ices  Act. I )97 (Act N(), 108 ~}f 1997). for
people who are now or who will, in (he r, as(mahly  near tuturc. be—
(i) relying upon;
(ii ) t:iking w;ltcr from: (w
(iii ) being sLlpplied  from,
the relevant water resource: anLI
(b) to prolect aquatic ecosystems  in (mlcr to s :cure ccoiogically” sustainable
dcvcl(qlmcnt  ancl use of [he relek:ult watt resource:
“rcsfmrcc  qu:ili(y” rnc:lns the quality of till II-: :ispects of a water resource
including-
((/) the qllillltl[y.  p~l[[drll,  [1111111~,  Wllkr  ICVL21  [1 ILI 21 SSLlrWICe  Of i!IStrClllll  f]OW;
(/~) the waler  q u a l i t y ,  incluLling Ilw physi( a l , chemical and bi[~logical
characteristics of (he water;
(c) the character and condition of [be instreal 1 and riparian habitat: and
(~/) the characteristics, L(mdition and distrihul ion of the aquatic biot:l:
“responsible auth(wily”, in relation to a speci( c power or dLity in respect of”
water uses. mean--
((l) it that power or duty has been assigned b y the Minister to a catcbmen[
nmnagcment  agency. that catchmcnt  man: gement agency: or
(b) it that power or Lluly has nt~t been st) awi, med. the Minister;
“riparian habitat” includes the physical structu] e and associated vegetation of
the areas associated with a watercourse which a -e commonly characterised by
alluvial soils, and which are inundated or tlo xled to an extent and with a
frequency sufficient to support vegetation of St ecies with a composition and
physical structure distinct from those of adjacc nt land areas;
“this Act” includes any regulations made undt r this Act:
“waste” includes any solid material or material bat is suspenckxi, dissolved or
transported in water (including sediment) and w hid] is spilled or deposited on
land or into a water resource in such volume. composition or manner as 10
cause, or to be reasonably likely to cause. the vater resource to be polluted:
“watercourse” means-
((I) a river or spring:
(h) a natural channel in which water flows ret:ular-ly or intermittently:
({) a wetland. lake or dam into which, or fror 1 which, water flows: und
(d) any collection of water which the Minister may, by notice in the G[/:c/tc,
declare (o be a watercourse,
and a reference to a watercourse includes. whee relevant, its bed and banks:
“water management area “ is an area establish 1 as a management unit in the
national water resource strategy within whit h a catchment  management
agency will conduct the protection. use. develo mwnt, conservation, manage-
ment and control of water resources:
5
I ()
15
20
VJ
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 10 ---

lx
?J(). 1{) I S2
GOVt  RNMENT  (; AZETTE. 26 A(IGLIST  1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATE ( ACT. 199X
(xxvi)
“water  management inslitLltion” means  :1 ca chment  management agerwy. a
water user association,  a body responsible 1 x intermrliomrl wflter manage-
ment or any person
who Iultils the Iuncl ions 0{ a water nlanagenwnt
institution in terms of this Act;
(xxvii)
“water resource’” includes a w:itercxml-sc, sur lace water, estuary. (w :Lquitel-:
(xxviii)
“w:lterwork”
includes any borehole, strut ure. earthwork or equipmen[
ins[:illcd or used Ior or in connection with Wi,tcr use;
(xxix)
“wetland”’ means land which is transitional between terrestrial and aquotic
systems where the water table is usually at o] new the surface, or the land is
periodically covered with shallow water, and which land in normal
circumstances supports or would support vegetation typically adapted to life
in s:uurated soil.
(2) In this Act. where a word or expression is given a particular meaning, other par[s
of speech and grammatical forms of that word or exprt ssion have, unless the contrm-y
intention appears from the relev:mt provisions, corresp mding meanings.
(3) When interpreting a provision of this Act, tiny re: sonable interpretation which is
consistent with the purpose (>f this Act as stated in secti( n 2. must hc prefcrrul over any
altcrnati\Je intcrprc totion which is inconsistent with th:l purpose,
(4) Expl:m:il(wy notes. printed in bold itnlics. :It the c ommenccment  of Ch:iptcrs :md
Parts must not be used in the interpret:]tion of any pro\ ision of this Act.
(5) Any directive or notice given in (ernw of this lcI must he in \vriting, unless
otherwise specified in this Act.
Purpose of Act
2. The purpose of’ [his Act is to ensure that (he nation”+ w~ter resources are protected.
used, developed, conserved, managed and controlled i[ ways which take into account
amongst other flrctors—
(CJ) meeting the basic human needs of’ present an i future generations:
(b) promoting equitable access to water;
(() redressing the results ot’ past raciol and gendt r discrimination;
(d) promoting the etlicient, sustainable and bene ici:d use of water in the public
interest:
(c) I’acili[atin.g social and ecxmomic tievelopmenl,
(/) providlog for growing demand for woter use:
(~) protecting uquatic ;Ind msociated ecosystems and their biological diversity:
(h) reducing and preventing polluti(m :md degrfic ation of’ water resources:
(i) meeting international obligations;
(j) promoling darn safely;
(k) managing tloocis and droughts,
and for achiev in: this purpose. to establish suit:~b]e ins! itutions and to ensure that they
huve appropritite community. racial and gender reprcsel Itation.
Public trusteeship of nation’s water resources
3. ( 1 ) As the public trustee of the nation-s water resol rces the National Government.
acting through the Minister. must emsurc that water s protected, used, developed,
conserved, m;muged tind controlled in:1 sustainable and ~ quitable manner, for the benefit
of :111 pcrs(ms  und in uccodance  with its cons[itu(ion;(l  nwld;l(c.
(?) Without limiting subsection ( I ), the Minister is Llltimiltely responsible to ensure
tba[ wutcr is allocated equittibly and used bcneliciall, I in the public interest, while
promoting cmvironmentul  volues.
(3) The National Government. octing through the Mit ister. hus the power to regulate
the USC. !low :md control of :111 water in the Republic.
5
I ()
15
Z()
X5
30
35
40


--- PAGE 11 ---

2(J
N(1. 19 I X2
(;OVF RNMENT  GAZETTE. 26 AU(;UST  1998
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATEI ACT, 199X
Entitlement to water use
4. ( I ) A person may use w:iter in or from a water resource for purposes such :LS
reasonable domestic use, domestic gardening, anim II watering, fire fighting and
recreational use, as set out in %hedule 1.
(2) A person may continue with an existing lawful water use in accordance with 5
section 34.
(S) A person may use water in terms of a general aut mrisation or Iicence under this
Act.
(4) Any entitlement granted to u person by m under [I is Act replaces any right to use
water which that person might otherwise have been abl : to enjoy or enforce under any 10
other law—
(a) to take or use water;
(h) to obstruct or divert a flow of water:
([) to affect the quality of any water;
(d) to receive any particular flow of water;
(e) to receive a Ilow of water of any particular qilality; or
(,/) to c~)nstruct. operate or maintain any waterw~ Irk.
Is
CHAPIER  2
WATER MANAGEMENT STR, iTEGIES
This Chapter deals with the development of stra, egies to facilitate the proper 20
management of water resources.
Part I : National water resource strategy
Part I requires the progressive development, by d, e Minister, after consultation
with society at large, of a national water resource strategy. The national water
resource strategy provides the framework for the ~rotection,  use, development, 25
conservation, management and control of water re.wm ce.v,ftw the country as a whole.
It also provides the framework within which water w ill be managed at regional or
catchment level, in dejined water management areas The national water resource
strategy, which must be formally reviewed from tit, te to titne, is binding on all
authorities and institutions exercising powers or perft rming duties under this Act.
30
Establishment of national water resource strategy
5.( I ) Subject to subsection (4). the Minister must, as soon as reasonably practicable,
by notice in the Guzefte, establish a national water reso ~rce stmtegy.
(2) The notice must state the address where the strat~ gy may be inspected.
(3) The water resources of the Republic must b: protected, used, developed, 35
conserved, managed and controlled in accordance will the national water resource
strategy.
(4) A national water resource strategy-
(f/) may he established in a phased and progrc wive tmanner and in separate
components over time: and
40
(h) must be reviewed at intervals of not more than five years.
(5) Before establishing a national water resource str: .tegy or any component of that
strategy in terms of subsection ( I ), the Minister nlust-
(CI) publish a notice in the G(ixtte-
(i) setting out a summary of the proposed strategy or the component in 45
question;
(ii) stating  the address  where  the proposed strategy or the component in
question is available for inspection: and
(iii) inviting written c~~nlnlents to be submitt :d on the proposed strategy or
the component in question, specifying a n address to which and a date 50
before which comments must be subn- itted, which date may not be
earlier than 90 days after publication of be notice:
(h) consider what further steps. if any. are appropt itite to bring tbe contents of the
notice to the attention of interested persons. md take those steps which the
Minister considers to be appropriate; and
55


--- PAGE 12 ---

YJ
N() 1°18?
GOVI RNMf;NT  GAZETTE, 26 AIJG(IST 19Y8
Act N(). M, 1998
NATloNA1.  W.NIY < ACT. 199X
(<) consider all comments received on or before the date specified in paragraph
(~i)( iii),
Contents of national water resource strategy
6. ( I ) The national water resource strategy must, SUI ject to section 5(4)(a)–
((l)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(t)
(g)
(/1)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(1)
(2) In
set out the strategies, objective~: plans. gu delines and procedures  of the
Minister and institutional arrangements rc Iating to the protection, use,
development, conservation, management a id control of water resources
within the framework of existing relevant ~overnment policy in order to
achieve—
(i) the purpose of this Act; and
(ii) any compulsory national standards pres :ribed under section 9(I) of the
Water Services Act, 1997 (Act No. 108 of 1997);
provide for at least—
(i) the requirements of the Reserve and idt ntify, where appropriate, water
resources from which particular require nents must be met;
(ii) international rights and obligations;
(iii) actions to be taken to meet projected fu ure water needs; and
(iv) water use of strategic importance:
establish water management areas and deterr line their bounciaries;
contain estimates of present and future wate~ requirements;
state the total quantity of water available with n each water management area;
state water management area surpluses or de icits;
provide for inter-catchment water trmsfers I letween surplus water manage-
ment areas rrnd deficit water management art as;
set out principles relating to water conservat  on and water demand manage-
ment:
state the objectives in respect of water qua ity to be achieved through the
classification system for water resources pro ‘ided for in this Act:
contain objectives for the establishment of institutions to undertake water
resource management;
determine the inter-relationship between
nstitutions involved in water
resource management: and
promote the management of catchments with n a water management area in a
holistic and integrated manner.
determining a water management area in [arms of subsection ( I )(c), the
Minister must take into account—
(a) watercourse catchment boundaries;
(/2) social and economic development patterns;
(c) efficiency considerations; and
(d) communal interests within the area in questil m.
Giving effect to national water resource strategy
7. The Minister, the Director-General. an organ of state and a water management
institution must give effect to the national water resour ‘e strategy when exercising any
power or performing any duty in terms of this Act.
Part 2: Catchment management strategies
Part 2 requires every catchment tnanagement  age 7CY to progressively develop a
catchment management strategy for the water resourc, IS within its water tnanagement
area. Catch rnent management strategies must be in h( rmony with the national w’ater
resource strategy. In the process of developing this stm tegy, a catchment management
agency must seek co-operation and agreement on F ‘ater-related  matters front the
various stakeholders and interested persons. The ca~ chrnent management strategy,
which must be reviewed from time to time, will inch lde a water allocation plan. A
5
I ()
15
20
25
30
35
40
15
50


--- PAGE 13 ---

24
No. 19182
GOV :RNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST ] 998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 199X
catchment management strategy must set principles. ~or allocating water to existing
and prospective users, taking into account all matter~ relevant to the protection, use,
development, conservation, management and control of water resources.
Establishment of catchment  management strategie!
8. ( 1 ) A catchment management agency contemplate J in Chapter 7 must, by notice in 5
the Gazette, establish a catchment management stl ategy for the protection, use,
development, conservation, management and control oi water resources within its water
management area.
(2) The notice must state the address where the str[ tegy may be inspected,
(3) A catchment management strategy—
10
(a) may be established in a phased and progr~ssive manner and in separate
components over time; and
(b) must be reviewed at intervals of not more th m five years.
(4) A catchment management strategy or any compo lent of that strategy may only be
established with the written consent of the Minister.
15
(5) Before establishing a catchment management st ategy or any component of that
strategy in terms of subsection ( l), a catchment mana~ emeot agency must—
(a) publish a notice in the Gaze~[e-
(i) setting out a summary of the proposed :atchment management strategy
or the componen(  in question;
20
(ii) stating the address where the propose( I strategy or the component in
question is available for inspection; anc
(iii) inviting written comments to be submi.ted  on the proposed stmtegy or
the component in question, specifying m address to which and a date
before which comments must be subt litted, which date may not be 25
earlier than 90 days after publication of the notice;
(b) consider what further steps, if any, are appror riate to bring the contents of the
notice to the attention of interested persons, and take those steps which tbe
catchment management agency considers to be appropriate; and
(c) consider all comments received on or befort the date specified in paragraph 30
(a)(iii).
Contents of catchment management strategy
9. A catchment management strategy must—
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
take into account the class of water resources and resource quality objectives
contemplated in Chapter 3, the requireme] Its of the Reserve and, where 35
applicable, international obligations;
not be in conflict with the national water res, mrce strategy;
set out the strategies, objectives, plans, gu ldelines and procedures of the
catchment management agency for the protet.tion, use, development, conser-
vation, management and control of watt r resources within its water 40
management area;
take into account the geology, demography, 1 md use, climate, vegetation and
waterworks within its water management area;
contain water allocation plans which are subject to section 23, and which must
set out principles for allocating water, taking into account the factors 45
mentioned in section 27(1);
take account of any relevant national or regi mal plans prepared in terms of
any other law, including any development pl: n adopted in terms of the Water
Services Act, 1997 (Act No. 108 of 1997);
enable the public to participate in managirq the water resources within its 50
water management area;
take into account the needs and expectations of existing and potential water
users; and
set out the institutions to be established.


--- PAGE 14 ---

? ()
N() 101X:
(X)V :RNklEN”r  [;,\ Zi;lTI:.  ?6 A[lGllST 19[)8
Ad No. 36. 1998
N/\TloNAl  WAH R A(”T.  11)9X
Guidelines for and consultation on catchment man gernent strategies
10. ( I ) The Minis(cr may cs(ablish guidelines 10 d)e prcptiration of catchtnent
management \tra(cgics.
(2) In de\cl{Jping a catchment  mantigeinent strw egy, a catchment m a n a g e m e n t
agency must consult with—
((l) [he Minister;
(h) tiny organ t~f’ s(a[e which has an interest in (} e corrtcn[, elhxt (Jr implementa-
tion of’ the catchmcnt management strategy: and
(<) any pers(ms,  (n- their representative (wganiw  ions-
(i) whose activities allcct or might atiect ~ater resources wi(hin its water
management area: and
( ii) who ha\/e an interest in the content, I :fTcct or implernentution of’ the
catchment management strategy.
(3) A catchrnent  management agency must, befor: the publication ofa notice in
terms of section 8(5)(a), refer tothe Minister forcc]ns deration anddeterrninati() n, any
proposed component of a catchment management stra egy which in the opinion of the
catchment management agency—
(a) raises arnaterial  question ofpolicy:or
(b) raises a questio nconcerning-
(i) therei:l(i()nship between thel>ep:]rtJller tandother c~rgarls (lfst:ite:c~r
(ii) the relationship between organs of skte and their respective roles in
developing or implementing a catchrne It rnanagenlent  strategy.
Giving effect to catchment management strategies
11. The Minister and the catchrnent management ag mcy concerned must give effect
toanycatchment  rnanagernent strateg ymtablish cduncerth  isPart when exercisin,g any
poweror  performinganydoty  ir]terrlls(JftllisAct.
CHAPTER 3
PROTECTION OF WATER RE SOURCES
The protection of water resources is fundamental j related to their use, develop-
ment, conservation, management and contra!.  Parts I, 2 and 3 of this Chapter lay
down a series of measures which are together intend ‘d to ensure the comprehensive
protection of all water resources. These measures ate to be developed progressively
within the contexts of the national water resource strategy and the catchment
management strategies provided for in Chapter 2. Par k 4 and 5 deal with measures to
prevent the polhition of water resources and mea ures to remedy the efects of
pollution of water resources.
Part 1: Classification system for nvter  resources
Part I provides for the>r.st stage in theprotection  p) ocess, which is the development
by the Minister of a system to classify the nation’ i water resources. The system
provides guidelines and procedures for determin~  ug different ciasses of water
resources.
Prescription of classification system
12. ( I ) As soon as is reasonably practicable. the Min ster must prescribe a syskrn for
~[:lssifying  water resources.
(2) The systcm Ior classifying water rewmrccs may —
(~i) cstahlish guidelines and procedures for dc[er nining dillerent classes of water
resources;
(h) in respect O( each class of mater rc.source-
(i) establish pr(xxxlures  for determining th ~ Reserve:
( ii) establish procedures  which are dcsigc 2d to satisfy the water quali[y
requirements (~t’ uater users as far as is reas(mhly  possible. without
signi(icltntly altering the natural wate” quality characteristics of the
rcw)urce:
5
10
15
Z()
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 15 ---

28
N(). 191X2
GO\ ERNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 19%?
Act No. 36, 19%+
NATIONAL WAT IR ACT, 1998
(iii) set out water uses for instream or land based activities which activities
must be regulated or prohibited in ord x to protect the water resource;
and
(c) provide for such other matters relating to t \e protection, use, development,
conservation, management tind control of vater resources, as the Minister 5
considers necessary,
Part 2: Class@cation  of water resources and rmource quality objectives
Under Part 2 the Minister is required to use the cl~ssijication system established in
Part I to determine the class and resource quality b bjectives of all or part of water
resources considered to be significant. The purpose e f the resource quality objectives 1 ()
is to establish clear goals relating to the quality of i he relevant water resources. In
determining resource quali~  objectives a balance mu vt be sought between the need to
protect and sustain water resources on the one hand, and the need to develop and use
them on the other. Provision is made for preliminary determinations of the class and
resource quality objectives of water resources before the formal classl~cation system 15
is established. Once the class of a water resource am 1 the resource quality objectives
have been determined they are binding on all au horities and institutions when
exercising any power or performing any duty under this Act.
Determination of class of water resources and reso mce quality objectives
13. ( I ) As soon as reasonably pmcticable after the dinister has prescribed a system 20
for classifying water resources the Minister must, subj:ct  to subsection (4), by notice in
the Gc{zei[e, determine for all or part of every signific mt water resource-
(a) a class in accordance with the prescribed Cli ssifrcation system; and
(b) resource quality objectives based on the class determined in terms of
paragraph (a).
25
(2) A notice in terms of subsection (I) must state th t geographical area in respect of
which the resource quality objectives will apply, the requirements for achieving the
objectives, and the dates from which the objectives w 11 apply.
(3) The objectives determined in terms of subsecti an ( 1 ) may relate t(J—
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
the Reserve;
the instream flow;
the water level;
the presence and concentration of particular substances in the water;
the characteristics and quality of the water resource and the instream and
riparian habitat;
the characteristics and distribution of aquati(: biota;
the regulation or prohibition of instream or and-based activities which may
affect the quantity of water in or quality of t le water resource; and
any other characteristic,
30
35
of the water resource in question.
40
(4) Before determining a class or the resource quality objectives in terms of
subsection ( I), the Minister must in respect of each w [ter resource—
(a) publish a notice in the Gaze?fe—
(i) setting out—
(au) the proposed class;
45
(bb) the proposed resource quality objectives;
(cc) the geographical area in respect of which the objectives will apply;
(old) the dates from which specific obje :tives will apply; and
(ee) the requirements for complying w th the objectives; and
(ii) inviting written comments to be subnitted  on the proposed class or 50


--- PAGE 16 ---

10
N() l~Jl X2
(io\l;RNNIENT( i/\ZETTE.26A  [l G[l ST 199X
Act N)..W 199S
NATIONAL WATI R ACT. 199X
(/1)
((’)
proposed rewwrcc quality objectives (a; the case may be). specifying an
address to which and a dale belore .vhich the comments are to be
sublnitkxi. which da(c may m][ be earlie than 60 ciirys after publicoti{m of
the notice:
consider what further steps. ii’ any, are apprmriate  to bring the contents 01” the
notice to the attentitm 01’ interested persnns, find take thrrsc steps which (I1c
Minister considers to be appropriate; and
consider all comments received on or befor ? the date specilied in paragraph
(a)(ii)
Preliminary determination of class or resource qu; lity objectives
14. (1) Until—
(a) a system for classifying water resources ha: been prescribed; or
(/J) a CI:lSS of’ a water resource or resource qualit: objectives has I-reen determined,
the Minister may, for all or part of a water resource ma .e u preliminary cieterrnination  of
the class or resource quality objectives.
(2) A determination in terms of section i 3 superse ies a preliminary determination.
Giving effect to determination of class of water resource and resource quality
objectives
15. The Minister, the Direc((lr-Gcncrai.  an orgun ( f state ami a wa(cr management
instituti(m, when exercising any power or performing: ny duty in terms of this Act, must
give effect to any determinati(m  of a class of a water esource and the resource quality
objectives as determined in terms of this Part and any “requirements for complying with
the resource quality objectives.
Part 3: The Reserve
Part 3 deals with the Reserve, which consists of tw( parts — the basic human needs
reserve and the ecological reserve. The basic llama, I needs reserve provides ,for the
essential needs of individuals served by the water re ;oarce in question and inciades
water for drinking, for food preparation and for pi rsonal hygiene. The ecological
reserve relates to the w’ater required to protect the ~ Iquatic  ecosystems of the water
resource. The Reserve refer.r to both the quantity md quality of the water in the
resource, and will vary depending on the class (~’ the resource. The Minister is
required to determine the Reserve. for all or part of any sigttijicant water resource. (f
a resource has not yet been classified, a preliminary a etertnination  of the Reserve tnay
be tnade and later superseded by a new one. Once ‘he Reserve is determined for a
water resource it is binding in the same way as tlu cIass and the resource quality
objectives.
Determination of Reserve
16. ( 1 ) As soon as remonably  practicable after th ? class of all or part nf a water
resource has been cictermineci. the Minister must. by nt ,tice in the Ga:eftt]. cieterminc (he
Reserve for ail or part of Iilat waler resource.
(2) A Lfcterrninati(m  of’ the Reserve rnmst-
(//) be in accor~iance with tiw class of tile wilt~l  resource as cieterrnined  in terms
of section i 3: and
(l)) ensure (hat ildequate allowance is made for eiich cornp(ment of (he Reserve.
( 3 ) 13ci’orc determining the Reserve in terms of SUI )section ( i ), the Minister musl-
([1) publish a rl(]tice in the G[f:c/tc’-
(i) setting out the pr~)pose(i  Reserve: and
( ii) in\iting  written comments to be suhr litted on the propmse~l  Reserve,
specifying an address to wilich anti a d; te before which c{mlments  are to
be submitted. wilicil (late may not be earlier tilan 60 clays a(ter
publication of the notice;
(/)) consiclcr what I’urtiwr  steps. if any, are apptx priate to bring IIle contents of tile
n~~tice to the ilttentitm of interested person) , and take those steps which tile
Minister considers (() be appropriate: iin~i
1()
5
1
is
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 17 ---

~~
N(]. [9182
GOW RNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(). M, 1998
NATIONAL WATE ? ACT, [998
(c) consider all comments received on or before the date specified in paragraph
(a)(ii).
Preliminary determinations of Reserve
17. ( I ) Until a system for classifying water resources has been prescribed or a class of
a water resource has been determined, the Minister—
(o) may, for all or part of a water resource; and
(b) must, before authorizing the use of water unjler section 22(5),
make a preliminary determination of the Reserve.
(2) A determination in terms of section 16(l) supe sedes a preliminary
tion.
Giving effect to Reserve
determina-
18. The Minister, the Director-General, an organ of state and a water management
institution, must give etfect to the Reserve as determ ned in terms of this Part when
exercising any power or performing any duty in terms of this Act.
Part 4: Pollution preventon
Part 4 deals with pollution prevention, and in ~ !articular the situation where
pollution of a water resource occurs or might occur 1 !s a result of activities on land.
The person who owns, controls, occupies or uses the land in question is responsible
for taking measures to prevent pollution of water reso, wces. If these measures are not
taken, the catchment management agency concerted may itself do whatever is
necessary to prevent the pollution or to remedy tts e~ects, and to recover all
reasonable costs frotn the persons responsible for the pollution.
Prevention and remedying effects of pollution
19. ( I ) An owner of land, a person in control of land I ~r a person who occupies or uses
the land on which—
(o) any activity or process is or was performed t r undertaken; or
(b) any other situation exis(s,
which causes, has caused or is likely to cause pollution I jf a water resource, must take all
reasonable measures to prevent any such pollution from occurring, continuing or
recurring.
(2) The measures referred to in subsection ( I ) may Include measures to—
‘ (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
w
(3) A
cease, modify or control any act or process” c ausing the pollution;
comply with any prescribed waste standard t ,r management practice;
contain or prevent the movement of pollutan :s;
eliminate any source of the pollution;
remedy the effects of the pollution; and
remedy tbe effects of any disturbance to the )ed and banks of a watercourse.
catchment management agency may direct a ly person who fails to take the
measures required under subsection ( 1 ) tc+
(a) commence taking specific measures before a given date;
(b) diligently continue with those measures; and
(c) complete them before a given date.
(4) Should a person fail to comply, or comply inadequately with a directive given
under subsection (3), the catchment management ag mcy may take the measures it
considers necessary to remedy the situation.
(5) Subject to subsection (6), a catchment rnanagem mt agency may recover all costs
incurred as a result of it acting under subsection (4) jointly and severally from the
following persons:
(a) Any person who is or was responsible fot or who directly or indirectly
contributed to, the pollution or the potential )ollution;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 18 ---

34
N(I. 191X?
(WV ERNMENT  GAZETTE 26 AU(i(lST 1998
Act No. M, IW8
N/\TIONA[. W’ATI R ACT. 19[)8
(b) the owner d’ [he land aI the time when tt e pollution or the potential tot
pollution occurred. or that owner’s successo--in-title:
([) the perwm in control 01 the land or any pers( n who hfis a right to use the land
lit the time when—
(i) the activity or the process is or was pm formed or undertaken; or
(Ii ) the situation cwme about: or
(d) any person who negligently failed ((~ preven:—
(i) the activity or the process being pcrl’or ned or undcrtuken: or
(ii) the situation from coming about.
(6) The catchmcnt management agency may in rcsp ct of the recovery of costs under
subsection  (5). clailn  from ;my other person who, i I the opinion 01’ the catchnwnt
mwl; lgetncnt agency, benetitted from the me;lsures um crtaken under subsection (~). to
the extent (JI’ such twnc~it.
(7) The costs claimed under subsection (5) must I m tre:rmnatde and may include.
with(ml being Iimitcd to. Iatx)ur. administrative and ()! erlwad costs.
(8) If’ more than one person is liable in terms o
subsection (5). the catchmcnt
mana:cment  agency must, at the request of any of th( se persoms. and otter giving the
other-s an opportunity to be heard, apportion the liability, but such apportionment does
not rc]icve ~lny 01 [hem ot” IIwir ;oint and several Ii;lhilit ‘ for the full amoLInl  of the costs.
Part .5: Emergency incid~ nts
Part .5 deals with pollution of water resources fol ‘owing an emergency incident,
such as an accident involving the spilling of a harm”ul substance that finds or may
jind its way into a water resource. The responsibility j v remedying the situation rests
with tite person responsible for the incident or the s tbstance involved. If there is a
failure to act, the relevant catchment management (tgency may take the necessary
steps and recover the costs from every responsible pe won.
Control of emergency incidents
20. ( I ) In this section “incident” inc]udes any il, eident or accident in which a
substance-
(CI) pollutes  or has the potential to pollute a wa(( r resource: or
(b) has, ~w is likely 10 have. a detrimental etlect on a water resource.
(2) In this secti(m. “responsible pwwm” includes a ly person who-
(~1) is responsible Ior the incident:
(b) owns the substance involved in the incident: or
(r) w:is in control of’ the substimce involved in the incident at the time of the
incident
(3) The [responsible person. any other pers(m invol led in the incident or any other
person with knowledge of the incident must, m soon as reasonably practicable  alter
obt;iinirrg knowlecige of the incident. report to-
(a) the Departtnent:
(h) the South African Police Service or the rele\ nnt fire department: or
({) the relevant catchment management agency
(4) A responsible person mtlst-
(a) take all reasonable measures to contain at d minimise the ef}ccts of lhc
incident:
(/?) undertake C[eilll-Llp  procedures:
(() remedy the ctfccts t}f’ the incident: and
(d) (iike such measures as the catchmenl managcinent  agency may either verbally
or in writing direct tvi(hin the time specilied by such institution.
(5) A verbal dircctivc must be confirmed in writing within 14 days, failing which it
will be deemed to have been withdrawn.
(6) Should-
5
10
15
Z()
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 19 ---

\ct so. 36.1998
N \TloNAL W,\TER  ,4 CT, II)YX
(a) the responsible person fail to comply. or Inadequately comply with a directive:
or
(b) it not be possible to give [he directive to [he responsible person timeously.
the catchmertt management agency may tuke [he meosures it considers necessury to—
(i) contain and minimise the effects of the incident:
(ii) undertake clean-up procedures: wld
(iii ) remedy the effects of the incident.
(7) The catchment management agency may recover’ all reasonable costs incurred by
it from every responsible person jointly and severail~.
(8) The costs claimed under subsection (7) may Include. withput being limited to.
Iabour. administration and overhead costs.
(9) If more than one person is liable in terms of subsection (7). the catchment
management agency must. at the request of any of those persons. and after giving the
others an opportunity to be heard. apportion the liability. but such apportionment does
not relieve any of them of their joint and several liability for the full amount of the costs.
CHAPTER 4
USE OF WATER
As this Act is founded on the principle that ,Vational Government has overall
responsibility for and aathon”ty  over water resource management, inc[uding  the
equitable allocation and beneficial use of water in the public interest, a person can
only be entitled to use water if the use is permissible under the .4ct. This Chapter is
therefore of central signi)cance  to the Act, as it lays the basis for reguiah”ng  water use.
The various types of licensed and unlicensed entitlements to use water are dealt with
in detail.
Part 1: General Principles
This Part sets out general principles for regulating water use. Water use is dejined
broadly, and includes taking and storing water, activities which reduce stream jiow,
waste discharges and disposals,
controlled ach”viti”es (activifi”es which impact
detrimentally on a water resource), altering a watercourse, removing water found
underground for certain purposes, and recreation. In general a water use must be
licensed unless it is listed in Schedule I, is an existing lawful use, is permissible under
a general authorisati”on,  or if a responsible authon”~  waives the need for a licence.
The Minister may limit the amount of water which a responsible authori~  may
allocate. In making regulations the Minister may differentiate between different water
resources, classes of water resources and geographical areas.
Water use
21. For the purposes of this Act. water use includes—
((Z)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
taking water from a water resource:
storing water:
impeding or diverting the flow of water in a watercourse:
engaging in a stream flow reduction activity contemplated in section 36;
engaging in a controlled activity identified as such in section 37( 1 ) or declared
under se~tion 38(1):
discharging waste or water containing waste into a water resource through a
pipe, canal. sewer. sea outfall or other conduit:
disposing of waste in a manner which may detrimentally impact on a water
resource;
disposing in any manner of water which contains waste from. or which has
been heated in. any industrial or power generation process;
altering the bed, banks. course or characteristics of a watercourse:
5
I ()
15
20
25
Xl
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 20 ---

.’ s
No. 1~)1 X2
(; OVERXVE,NT  (;, AZEll_E.  :6 .A1’GUST IWX
$ct W. 36.1998
\ 4TION AL LV,irER <CT. 1998
(j)
removing, discharging or disposing ot’ water found underground il’ it is
necessary for the etficient continua~ion  of Ml activity or for the >afety (JF
people: and
(k) using w~ter For recreational purposes,
Permissible water use
22, ( 1 J A person may onlv use water-
(u) without a lic&ce-
(i) if that water use is permissible under Schedule I:
(ii) if that water use is permissible as a continuation of zn existing
lawful use; or
(iii) if that water use is permissible in terms of a general authorisation
issued under section 39:
(b) if the water use is authorised by a licence under this Act: or
(c) if the responsible authority has dispensed with a Iicence requirement
under subsection (3).
(2) A person who uses water as contemplated in subsection ( 1 )—
(a) must use the water subject to any condition of the rele~ant authorisation for
that use:
(b) is subject to any limitation. restriction or prohibition in terms of this Act or any
other applicable law:
(c) in the case of the discharge or disposal of waste or water containing waste
contemplated in section 2 l(j]. (g). (h) or (j). must comply with any applicable
waste standards or management practices prescribed under section 26( I)(h)
and (i). unless the conditions of the relevant authorisation provide otherwise:
(d) may not waste that water: and
(e) must return any seepage. run-off or water containing waste which emanates
from that use. to the water resource from which the water was taken. unless
the responsible authority directs otherwise or the relevant authorisation
provides otherwise.
(3) A responsible authority may dispense with the requirement for o licence for water
use if it is satistied that the purpose of this Act will be met by the grant of a Iicence.
permit or other authorisation under any other law.
(4) In the interests of co-operative governance, a responsible authority may promote
arrangements with other organs of state to combine their respective Iicence requirements
into a single Iicence requirement.
(5) A responsible authority may. subject to section 17. authorise the use of water
before—
(a) a national water resource strategy has been established:
(b) a catchment management strategy in respect of the water resource in question
has been established:
(c) a classification system for water resources has been established:
(d) the class and resource quality objectives for the water resource in question
have been determined; or
(e) the Reserve for the water resource in question has been finally determined.
(6) Any person who has applied for a Iicence in terms of section 43 in respect of an
existing lawful water use as contemplated in section 32. and whose application has been
refused or who has been granted a Iicence for a lesser use than the existing lawful water
use, resulting in severe prejudice to the economic viability of an undertaking in respect
of which the water was beneficially used, may. subject to subsections (7) and (8). claim
compensation for any financial loss sutiered in consequence.
(7) The amount of any compensation payable must be determined—
(a) in accordance with section 25(3) of the Constitution: and
(b) by disregarding any reduction in the existing lawful water use made in order
to--
(~) provide for the Reserve;
(ii) rectify an over-allocation of water use from the resource in question: or
(iii) rectify an unfair or disproportionate water use.
(8) A claim for compensation must be lodged with the Water Tribunal within six
months of the relevant decision of the responsible authority.
5
10
15
20
25
~~
~~
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 21 ---

40
,No. 19)82
GOVERNNIENT  GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST IWH
.\ct No. 36.1998
NATIONAL W,ATER .ACT. 1998
(9) The Water Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine liability for compensation and
the amount of compensation payable in terms of this section.
( 10) After the Water Tribunal has decided that compensation is payable and
determined the amount of compensation. the responsible authority may enter into
negotiations with the claimant and. within 30 days after the decision ot the Water 5
Tribunal, offer an allocation ot’ wuter instead ot’ compensation.
Determination of quantity of water which may be allocated by responsible
authority
z3. ( I ) Subject to the national water resource strategy the Minister may determine the
quantity of water in respect of which a responsible authority may issue a general 10
authorisation and a Iicence from water resources in its water management area.
(2) Until a national water resource strategy has been established, the Minister may
make a preliminary determination of the quantity of water in respect of which a
responsible authority may issue a general authorisation and Iicence.
(3) A preliminary dete~inatlon must be replaced by a determination under 15
subsection ( 1 ) once the national water resource strategy has been established.
(4) A responsible authority must comply with any determination made under
subsection ( 1 ) or (2).
(5) In making a dete~ination under subsections ( 1 ) and (2) the Minister must take
account of the water availabie in the resource.
~o
Licences for use of water found underground on property of another person
24. A licence may be granted to use water found underground on land not owned by
the applicant if the owner of the land consents or if there is good reason to do so.
Transfer of water use authorisations
25. (1) A water management institution may. at the request of a person authorised to 25
use water for irrigation under this Act. allow that person on a temporary basis and on
such conditions as the water management institution may determine. to use some or ail
of that water for a different purpose, or to allow the use of some or all of that water on
another property in the same vicinity for the same or a similar purpose.
(2) A person holding an entitlement to use water from a water resource in respect of 30
any land may surrender that entitlement or part of that entitlement—
(a) in order to facilitate a particul~  Iicence application under section 41 for the
use of water from the same resource in respect of other land: and
(b) on condition that the surrender only becomes effective if and when such
application is granted.
35
(3) The annual report of a water management institution or a responsible authority. as
the case may be, must, in addition to any other information required under this Act.
contain details in respect of every permission granted under subsection ( 1 ) or every
application granted under subsection (2).
Regulations on use of water
40
26. ( 1 ) Subject to subsection (4). the Minister may make regulations—
(a) limiting or restricting the purpose, manner or extent of water use;
(b) requiring that the use of water from a water resource be monitored, measured
and recorded;
(c) requiring that any water use be registered with the responsible authority; 45
(d) prescribing the outcome or effect which must be achieved by the installation
and operation of any waterwork;
(e) regulating the design, construction. installation, operation and maintenance of


--- PAGE 22 ---

42
N() l~)lx2
(;OV ,RNMEN”I (i)\7.tIT[i.  26 A(l(i  LIS’r l’)~)x
AN No. .M. 199ft
NW loNA[. W’AT[ R /!(’T. 19’)8
any water-work, where it is necessary (Jr Liesil able to monitor tiny water use or
It) protect u waler res(mrce:
(/) requiring qualifications for and registration lt persons aulh(wiscd  ttl design.
construct. insttill, operate and m:linlain any v aterwork, in order to protect the
public and to safeguard human life and pro~~rty;
5
(,~) regulating or prohibiting any activity in ord ‘r to protect a water resource or
instream or riparian habitat;
(h) prescribing waste st;inclards which specify tt e quantity. quality and tempera-
ture 01’ waste which may be discharged or de msited in(o or allowed [o enter a
water resource;
1 ()
(i) prescribing the outcome or etfect which mu J( be achieved through manage-
ment practices t’or the treatment of waste, o any elms of waste, before it is
discharged or deposited into or allowed to e )ter a tvater resource:
(j) requiring that waste discharged or deposited into or allowed to enter a water
resource be monitored and amdysed. and prescribing methods for such
15
monitoring and analysis:
(k) prescribing procedural requirements for lice Ice applications;
(/) relating to transactions in respect of aurhoris;  tions to use water, including but
not limited to-
(i) the circumstances under which a transa :tion may be permitted:
Z()
(ii) the conditions subject to which a tramsi ction may take place; and
(iii) the procedure to deal with a transaction;
(ni) prescribing methods for making a volumetr [c determination of’ uater to be
~lscribed to a stream flow reduction acti\ Ity for purposes of water use
allocation and the imposition of charges:
15
(n) prescribirlg procedures ti)r the allocation of w .iter by means of public tender or
auction: and
(o) prescribing-
(i) procedures for obtaining: and
(ii ) the rtquircd  contents of.
assessments ot (he likely effect which any p[ .)poscd licence may have on the
qu:l)ity  of” the w~lt~r res(~ur~c in qL1estion.
(~) Regulations  made Under sLlbsection  ( I ) Inay -
(a) diflkrentia(e  between different water resourc :s and dit~erent classes ot’ wuter
res(wrces:
35
(/~) Lfillerentiate between di~erent geographical ireas: and
(() create oflences and prescribe penalties.
(3) Regulations made under subsection ( I )(h), (i) ald (,j) may contain-
(~{) general provisions applicable to all waste; at d
(b) specific provisions applicable to waste with ,pecitic chflracteristics.
40
(4) When making regulations, the Minister must take into account all relevant
collsicler:tti(~tls, including the need to-
({/) promote the economic and sustainable use o water:
(/~) conserve and protect water resources or. inst earn and riparian habitat:
(() prevent wasteful water me:
(d) facilitate the management of water use and \ waterworks:
(c) facilitate the monitoring of water use and w: ter resources: and
(f) facilitate the imposition and recovery of cha ges.
30
Part 2: Considerations, conditions and essentia  ’ requirements of general
authorisations and Iicen{ es
50
This Part dea[s with matters reievant to all genet al authorisations and licenees
issued ander the Act. It gliides responsible alltho -ities in tit e exercise of their
discretion to issue and to attach conditions to general authorisations and [icences. It
also sets out the essential features of licences, such as efiective periods, purposes and
places for which they may be issued, and the nature of ‘onditions that maybe attached 55
to thcvn. The granting of a Iicence does not implv any guarantee regarding the
availability or qualilv of water which it covers.


--- PAGE 23 ---

44
N(J. 191X2
(;OV ERNMENT  GAZE~EL 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL WAT1 R ACT, 1998
Considerations for issue of general authorisations : nd Iicences
27. ( I ) In issuing a general authorisation or Iicence i responsible authority must take
into account all relevant factors, including-
(a)
(b)
(c’)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
existing lawful water uses;
the need to redress the results of past racial md gender discrimination;
efficient and beneficial use of water in the p lblic interest;
the socio-economic impact—
(i) of’ the water use or uses if’ authorised; ( r
(ii) of the fi~ilure to authorise the water use or uses;
any catch ]ment management strategy applicable to the relevant water resource;
the likely effect of the water use to be authori ;ed on the water resource and on
other water users;
the class and the resource quality objectives of the water resource;
investments already made and to be made b: the water user in respect of the
water use in question;
the strategic importance of the water use to ]e authorised;
the quality of water in the water resource which may be required for the
Reserve and for meeting international oblig: tions; and
the probable duration of any undertaking & which a water use is to be
authorised.
(2) A responsible authority may not issue a Iicen :e to itself without the written
approval of’ the Minister.
Essential requirements of Iicences
28. ( I ) A Iicence contemplated in this Chapter must specify—
(a) the water use or uses for which it is issued;
(b) the property or area in respect of which it is issued;
(c) the person to whom it is issued;
(d) the conditions subject to which it is issued;
(e) the Iicence period, which may not exceed fo ty years; and
(~) the review periods during which the Iicence may be reviewed under section
49, which must be at intervals of not more tl an five years.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), restriction, suspension or termination in terms of this
Act and review under section 49, a Iicence remains in orce until the end of the Iicence
period, when it expires.
(3) Subject to subsection (4) and notwithstanding; section 49(2), a responsible
authority may extend the licence period of a Iicence if this is done as part of a general
revipw of licences carried out in terms of section 49.
(4) An extension of a Iicence period contemplated in: ubsection (3) may only be made
after the responsible authority has considered the facto “s specified in section 49(2) and
all other relevant factors, including new applications f ]r water use and has concluded
that there are no substmttial grounds not to grant an ex iension.
(5) An extension of a Iicence period in terms of subsection (3) may only be given for
a single review period at a time as stipulated in subsection ( 1 )(f).
(6) If the Iicence period of a Iicence is extended in ter ns of subsection (3), the licence
may, in respect of the period for which it is extende[ , be issued subject to different
conditions which may include a lesser permitted water use.
Conditions for issue of general authorisations and 1 cences
29. ( I ) A responsible authority may attach conditions o every general authorisation or
licence—
(u) relating to the protection of—
(i) the water resource in question;
(ii) the stream flow regime; and
(iii) other existing and potential water users;
(h) relating to water management by—
5
1 ()
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 24 ---

46
N{) 1~1 182
G()\ ERNMENT  GAZETTE. 26 AIJGIIST 1908
Act ?40. 36. 19Wt
NATIONA1.  W.Xrl R ACT. 1998
([’)
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
specifying mawrgement  practices and g neral requirements for any writer
use, including water conser\a(icm  mea! ures;
requiring the monitoring and analysis of and reporting on every water LISC
and imposing a duty to measure aml record aspects of water use.
specifying mcmuring  and recording de /ices to be used:
requiring the preparation and apprrmu I of’ and adherence to, a water
management plan:
requiring the paytnent of chw-ges for wa er use as provided f’t)r in Chapter
5;
requiring the licensee to provide or m Ike water available to a person
specified in the Iicence: anti
in the case of a general authorisation. requiring the registration  01 the
water use with the responsible au[bority .md the pay]nent of u registration
lee as a pre-conditirm of that use;
relating to return flow and discharge or disp ml of waste, by—
(i) specifying a water resource to which it t lust bc returned or ottwr manner
in which it must be disposed OL
(ii) specifying permissible levels for some ( r all of its chemical and physical
colnponents:
(iii) specifying treatment to which it mitst be subjected. bclorc it is
discharged: and
(iv) specifying the volume which tmry be r~ turned:
(d) in the case of a controlld activi(y ---
(i) specifying the waste treatment. pollution control and
equipment to he instollecl. maintained a d operated: and
(ii) specifying the management practices to be followed to
pollution of any water resource;
(c) in the case of’ taking or storage of’ water-
rnonitoring
prevent the
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
setting out the spccitic quantity of water ~r percentage of’ flow which may
be taken:
setting out the rate of abstraction:
specifying the method of construction t ,f a borehole and [he method of
abstraction from the boreholc:
specifying the place from where water nay be taken:
specifying the times when woter may b: taken;
identifying or limiting the area of’ land [ n which any water ttiken from a
resource may be used:
limiting the quantity of water which m: y be stored;
specifying locations where water may t e stored: tind
requiring the licensee to become a mer Ibcr of a water user association
before water may be taken;
in the case of a stream flow reduction activit Y—
(i) specifying practices to be f’ollowed to imit stream flow reduction and
other detrimental impacts on the water esource: and
(ii) setting or prescribing a method for dete mining the extent of the stream
flow reduction caused by the authorised activity;
which are necessary or desirable to achic\e  tile purpose for which the licence
W:M issued;
which are rwcessary or desirable to ensure cc mpliance with the provisions of
this Act: and
in tbe case of a liccncc-
(i) specifying times when water may or m: y not be used;
(ii ) containing provisions for its termination if’ an authorised use of water is
not implemented (u not I’ully implcmen ed;
( iii) dcsigmrting water for future or continge It use: or
(i\’) which have I-mm agreed to by [be licen~ ee.
(2) If a licensee has agreed (o pay compensation to another person in !erms of any
arran~emcnt  to use \vater. the responsible authori(y n ay make the obligation to puy
conlpens:ltion a condition 01” the Iicence.
5
1()
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 25 ---

48
N(). 19182
(WV] RNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUG[JST  1998
Act No. M, 1998
NATIONAL WATE < ACT, 1998
Security by applicant
30. ( 1 ) A responsible authority may, if it is necessar for the protection of the water
resource or property, require the applicant to give securi y in respect of any obligation or
potential obligation arising from a Iicence to be issued under this Act.
(2) The security referred to in subsection ( 1 ) may in :Iude any of the following:
5
(i) A letter of credit from a bank;
(ii) a surety or a bank guarantee;
(iii) a bond;
(iv) an insurance policy; or
(v) any other appropriate form of security.
1 ()
(3) The responsible authority must determine the t:pe, extent and duration of any
security required.
(4) The duration of the security may extend beyond the time period specified in the
Iicence in question.
(5) If the responsible authority requires security in th e form of an insurance policy, it 15
mtiy require that it be jointly insured under or be a her eficiary of the insurance policy
and where appropriate, the responsible authority m ]st be regarded as having an
insurable interest in the subject matter of the insurance policy.
(6) A person may apply in writing to the responsible.: authority to have any security
given by that person in terms of this section amended c r discharged at any time, which 20
application may not be unreasonably refused.
Issue of Iicence no guarantee of supply
31. The issue of a Iicence to use water does not imp y a guarantee relating to—
(a) the statistical probability of supply;
(b) the availability of water; or
25
(c) the quality of water.
Part 3: Existing lawful wate] uses
This Part permits the continuation under certain L onditions  of an existing water
use derz”ved  from a law repealed by this Act. An exist ng lawful water use, with any
conditions attached, is recognised but may continue , mly to the extent that it is not 30
limited, prohibited or terminated by this Act. No licen :e is required to continue with
an existing lawful water use until a responsible autho  ity requires a person claiming
such an entitlement to apply for a licence. If a licence is issued it becomes the source
of authon”ty  for the water use. If a licence is not yranted the use is no longer
permissible.
35
Definition of existing lawful water use
32. ( 1 ) An existing lawful water use means a water t se—
(a)
(b)
and
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(2) In
((I)
(b)
which has-taken place at any time during a p :riod of two years immediately
before the date of commencement of this Act, or
which has been declared an existing lawful w ater use under section 33,
40
which—
was authorised by or under any law which was in force immediately before the
date of commencement of this Act;
is identified as a stream flow reduction activiy  in section 36(I); or
is identified as a controlled activity in sectior 37(1).
45
the case of—
a stream How reduction activity declared und :r section 36(1); or
a controlled activity declared under section 3 ].
existing lawful water use means a water use which has t lken place at any time during a
period of two years immediately before the date of the Jeclamtion.
50


--- PAGE 26 ---

50
xc) 191s2
(.;[)VER,NMENT  G,AZE’ITE. 26 AL’ GI.,ST 19Y8
.\ct No. 36.1998
Y,\rIONAL “i\ ATER  ACT. 1998
Declaration of water use as existing lawful water use
33. ( 1 ) A person may apply to a responsible ~uthonty to have a water use which is not
one contemplated in section 32( 1)(b)(i). (ii) or (iii}. decltwed to be an existing lawful
water use.
(2) A responsible authority moy. on its own initiative. declare a water use which is not
one contemplated in section 32( 1 )(b)(i), (ii) or (iii). to be an existing lawful water use.
(3) A responsible authority mtiy only make d declaration under subsections(l) ond (2)
if it is satistied  that the water use—
(a) took place more than two years before the date of commencement of’ this Act
and wx discontinued for yood reason: clr
(b) had not yet token place at any time before the date of commencement of this
Act but—
(i) would ha~e been lawful had it so taken place: and
(ii) steps towards effecting the use had been taken in good faith before the
date of commencement of this Act.
(4) Section 41 applies to m application in terms of this section as if the application
had been made in terms of that section.
Authority to continue with existing lawful water use
34. ( 1 ) A person. or that person-s successor-in-title, may continue with an existing
lawful water use, subject to-
(a) any existing conditions or obligations attaching to that use;
(b) its replacement by ~ licence in terms of this Act: or
(c) any other limitation or prohibition by or under this Act.
(2) A responsible authority may. subject to any regulation made under section
26( 1)(c). require the registration of an existing lawful water use.
Verification of existing water uses
35. ( 1 ) The responsible authority may. in order to verify the lawfulness or extent of an
existing water use, by written notice require any person claiming an entitlement to that
water use to apply for a verification of that use.
(~) A notice under subsection ( 1 ) must_
(a) have a suitable application form annexed to it:
(b) specify a dtite before which the application must be submitted;
(c) inform the person concerned that any entitlement to continue with the water
use may lapse if an application is not made on or before the specified date; and
(d) be delivered personally or sent by registered mail to the person concerned.
(3) A responsible authority—
(a) m~y require the applicant. at the applicant’s expense. to obtain and provide it
with other information, in addition to the information contained in the
application:
(b) may conduct its own investigation into the veracity and the lawfulness of the
water use in question;
(c) may invite written comments from any person who has an interest in the
matter; and
(d) must afford the applicant an opportunity to make representations on any
aspect of the application.
(4) A responsible authority may determine the extent and lawfulness of a water use
pursuant to an application under this section, and such determination limits the extent of
any existing lawful water use contemplated in section 32(1).
(5) No person who has been required to tipply for verification under subsection(1) in
respect of an existing lawful water use may exercise that water use—
(a) after the closing date specified in the notice, if that person has not applied for
verification; or
5
[()
15
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 27 ---

Pm-t 4: Stream jlo w reductiou  activities
.5
Tilis Part uliows the Miaister, ajter public consli[tatian,  to regulate land-based
activities which reduce stream jlo w, by declaring such activities to be streant jio w
reductiou  activities. I})ltether  or not an activity is declared ta be a stream jlo w
r(>duction  activity depends on various jilctors, such as the exteut of stream jlo w
reduction, its duration, and its itnpact on any relevant water resource and on other I ()
water users. ‘The control of jorestry  jbr its impact ott water resources, ctirreutl}’
exercised in tertns oj’ the Forest Act, is now exercised under this Part.
Declaration uI’ stream flow reduction activities
36. ( 1 ) The lollowing :Irc stream tlow reduction activities:
((I) (he usc 01 l:md for nlt”(wcsta[i(m  which has been or is being es(:lblishcd for I S
commerci~ll purposes; and
(/~) wl :wtivity which Ims been declared as such under subsection (2).
(2) The Minis[er m:iy. by noliuc in (he G(/:ct/c, in relati~)n (():1 p:w(iculm :IIC;I spcciticd
in [hut notiuc, declare MIy activity (including the cultivation O( imy par(iculur crop t)r
other vegetation) [o be a stream flow reduction activity it (hat activity is Iihely [o reLILIce  20
(hc avuilabi]ity 01’ wa(el- in ii wiitercoul-se to the Rese[-vc,
to meet intcind(i(m:[l
t)blig;lti(ms,  (w to [)[her w:ller users si~nilic:m[ly.
milking u Lleclwatkm under suhscction  (2), (hc Minister must considcr-
[hc extent to which the activity significantly reduces [he w~([er uvuil;ibility  in
ttle Watl!lcoulst!;
?5
the ell’ect 01’ the stream  [low reduction on the water resource in terms 01 its
CIMS and (he Rcwrve;
the pr{~bdllc durali[m 01 (Iw ~ictivity;
tiny n;lti(mal water rcs(wrce strutcgy esl:hlished under sccli(m 5; LIncl
:my catch nwnl nlmagcnwnt  s[mtcgy esl:lblished under seclion 8.
30
(4) Bet’or~ mtiking a decl:ua~i(m under sub~ection  (2), the Minisier Inus(
(a)
(/))
((”)
(~i)( ii).
(S) Every  notice  published in terms  01” subsection  (4)(a) must conl~in  :1 sclmdulc  in
which  Inust be Iislcd a l l  s(rc:II]) Ilov lrcduuli(m uu[ivitim  set oul in suhscclion  ( I ) :11111  45
(how  which h:l\c, up to the da[c t)t’ the m)ticc, been declared [() be stwwn I1OW rcduc[ion
:Ic’[ivilics under subscclit)ll  (2).
I’art .5: Controlledact ivities
This Part allo n’s the Minister to regulate activities having a altritnental  impact ou
w~aterresoltrces b.ydeci{trit~g  t)tettt to be controlle dactivities. Foarsuc hactivities- 50
irrigation using waste or water contaia ing waste from certain sources, modijicatiou  of
attnosphericp  recipitation, [llteritlg tllefl[)w regittle(~fa water resource as aresult (!f


--- PAGE 28 ---

54
No. 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(J. 36, 199s
NAT1ONAL  WATER  ACT, 1998
power generation, and aquifer recharge using waste or water containing waste — are
identified in the Act as controlled activities. Provision is made for the Minister to
declare olher controlled activities as the need arises, but in these cases public
consultation is required. Following the identification or declaration of a controlled
activity un authorisation for that particular category of activity is required under this
Act.
Controlled activity
37. ( I ) The fol]owing are controlled activities:
(u) irrigation ofany land with waste or water containing waste generated through
any industrial activity or by a waterwork;
(b) an activity aimed ot the modification of atmospheric precipitation;
(c) u power generation activity which alters the flow regime of a water resource;
(d) intentional recharging of an aquifer with any waste or water containing waste;
and
(e) an activity which has been declared as such under section 38.
(2) No person may undertake a controlled activity unless such person is authorised to
do so by or under this Ac(,
Declaration of certain activities as controlled activities
38. ( 1 ) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, in general or specifically, declare
an iictivity to be a controlled activity.
(2) Before declaring tin activity to be a controlled activity the Minister must be
satisfied that the activity in question is likely [u impact detrimentally on a wmer
resource.
(3) Before making a declaration under subsection ( 1 ) the Minister—
(u) must publish a notice in the Gaze[re—
(i) setting out the activity or category of activities proposed to be deciared;
and
(ii) inviting written comments to be submitted on the proposed decl~iration.
specifying an address to which and a date before which comments are to
be submitted, which dote may not be earlier than 60 days after
publication of the no[ice; and
(b) muy, in the case of a specific activity on a specific site, make the notice known
by delivering or sending a copy to the owner or the person in control of the site
in question, and to every organ of state which, and every person who, has an
interest in the matter;
(c) must consider what further steps, if any, are appropriate to bring the contents
of the notice to the attention of interested persons, and take those steps which
the Minister considers to be appropriate; and
(d) must consider all comments received on or before the date specified in
p a r a g r a p h .
(4) Every notice published in terms of subsection ( I ) mus[ conttiio u schedule on
which must be listed all controlled activities set out in section 37( I )(a) to (d) and those
which have, up to the date of the notice, been declared to be controlled activities under
subsection ( l).
Part 6: General authorisations
This Part establishes a procedure to enable a responsible authority, after public
consultation, to permit the use of water by publishing general authorisations in the
Gazette. A general authorisation may be restricted to a particular water resource, a
particular category of persons, a defined geographical area or a period of time, and
requires conformity with other relevant laws. The use of water under a general
authorisation does not require a licence until the general authorisation is revoked, in
which case licensing will be necessary. A general authorisation does not replace or
litnit an entitlement to use wateq such as an existing lawful water use or a licence,
which a person may otherwise have under this Act.
5
lo
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 29 ---

.\c’l \(l. 36, 1998
Nil loNA1/ W’AIE.K  A(’”1’.  199X
(iencral iluthorisations  to use water
39. ( 1 ) A t-tsp(msiblc  ;iulhf)rily nmy, subject to Schcdulc 1, by notice in the Gu:(Jttt’-
((1) gcnclully:
(b) in rclali(m [0 [1 spccitic wuter resource; (x
(() w ilhin w) are:i ywcifiwt in the m)lice.
:Iul!]tll”isc all or aIIy L’:Ilcgt)I”y  ~)t” p e r s o n s  10 usc w’~llcr. suhjcct  10 my rcguldli~m  nludc
IIndcr \cclit)n 26 dnct :iny cx)ndilions inlpowd under scclioil 29.
( 2 )  ‘WC n~)(icc n)us( SI:IIC (he geogrophic;ll  area in respect  01” w h i c h  the gcneml
:itl(l]ot-ii~ltii)ll  will apply. and IIW da[e upon which the general author  is:i[ ion will conw
into I(NCC, :md moy SIUIC (he du(e on which the general :m[horisation will lapse.
(3) A w;lter usc m;iy be authorised under subsection ( 1 ) on condition tha[ the user
(h(:lins any permission (x uu(hority  rcquirmi  by any other speciticd lnw,
(4) 13ct’orc issuing ii general fiuthorisati(m,  the responsible au[hority must
(~{) publish tl n[)tice in the &t:ellt’-
( i ) Selting OU1 the proposed gcncnd uuthoristiti(m;  and
( ii) in\i[ing writlen comments to be submitted on the proposed general
au(horis;ltion. specifying an address [o which and u date bet(me which
conlmcnls arc 10 be submitted, which Llatc nMy not be curlier than 60
days ut(cr pubiic:i(i(m of’ the notice:
(b) c()r]sidcr wll:ltfLlrttler  s[cps, if':lt]y, aretlppr[)pri:ite t(~bring tbec()[]tellts {)lttle
notice to (be ~lttcntion ofinterestecl persons. and lake those steps which [he
resp(msih!c  :Iutbori(y cx~nsidcrs to be :lppropri:Lte; anLJ
([) ct)tlsidcr ;lllc()tllil]ctlts receivcd [)rlc)r before thed:ite  specified illp~lr:1gral>ll
((/)( ii).
(5) An :mlh(wis;ition to use wil(cr under (his section does not repl:lce (w Iinlit [my
cnti(lenwn[ to usc wti(cr which a person may otherwise have under this Act.
Part 7: Individual applications for liceuces
This Part sets out the procedures which apply in all cases where a Iicence is
requiredto use water, hut where nogeueral  invitation toapply.for  liceuces has been
issued underPart 8. Water users who are uot requiredto license their use, but who
w’ish to convert the use to licensed use, may also use the procedure set out iu this Part,
but the respousib[e  authority tnay deciiue to graut a liceuce wheu the app!icatlt  is
entitled to the use of water under au existing lawful use or by a general authorisation.
[u coasideriug an application a respousib[e  authority may require a[iditionu[
iuftmnatiotl from the applicant, aud may also require the applicaut to uudertake  an
en virontueutal  or other assess tnent, which asses stnents may be subject to independent
review.
Application for Iicence
4(L ( I ) A person  who is required tw wishes to obt:tin a Iicence (o use water must apply
lo IIw rclcv:lnl respt~nsiblc :Iuthorily for d Iicence.
(~) Where  &i person  htLs Ill;lde m tippliCUllOtl  for an authol-isa[ion  to LISe water  U n d e r
wl~~thcr Act, and [hat applictlt ion hus not been finui ised when this Act takes etfect. [he
:Ipplicii[i(m must be rcg:mted as being an application for a water use under this Ac[.
( 3 ) A rcsp~msib[c :mth(wity n~ay charge :t rcw)nabie  t’ec for processing ii Iiccncc
:Ippllc:ition,  whluh II IiIy b~’ \viIIvcd  In d~’s~>rvlng CM L>S.
(4) A rcspfm\ible uutborily mtiy decline to consider a licence upptica[i[m  lor IIw uw
01” \v:l[cr 10 ~’hich tbc app!icmt is alredy cntilled by w~y t)fan existing !:IwfLIl  water usc
or umtcr  d genemt  au[horisa[ion.
30
35
40
45


--- PAGE 30 ---

58
N(). 19182
GOVI :RNMENT  (; AZE’tTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Ad No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATE < ACT, 1998
Procedure for Iicence applications
41. ( 1 ) An application for a Iicence for water use ml st—
(</) be made in the form;
(/Jj contain the informati(m; and
(() be accompanied by the processing fee,
determined by the responsible authority.
(2) A responsible authority-
(11)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3) A
may, to the extent that it is reasonable to do so, require the applicant, at the
applicant’s expense, to obtain and provide it by a given date witll—
(i) other information, in addition to the information contained in the
application;
(ii ) an assessment by a competent person of the like] y effect of the proposed
Iicence on the resource quality; and
(iii) an independent review of the asses ;ment furnished in terms of
subparagraph (ii), by a person acceptab e to the responsible authority;
may conduct its own investigation on the likely etiect of the proposed Iicence
on the protection, use, development, conser\ ation, management and control
of the water resource;
may invite written comments from any organ )f state which or person who has
an interest in the matter; and
must afford the applicant an opportunity tt, make representations on any
aspect of the licence application.
responsible authority may direct that any assessment under subsection
(2)(u)(ii)  must comply with the requirements cwrtaitted in regulations made under
section 26 of the Environment Conservation Act, 1989 (Act No. 73 of 1989),
(4) A responsible authority may, at any stage of the application process, require the
applicant—
(ti) to give suitable notice in newspapers and otter media—
(i) describing the Iicence applied for;
(ii) stating that written objections may be lodged against the application
before a specified date, which must be nl )( less than 60 days after the last
publication of the notice;
(iii) giving an address where written objectil ms must be lodged; and
(iv) containing such other particulars as he responsible authority may
require;
(b) to take such other steps as it may direct to brin g the application to.the attention
of relevant organs of state, interested person! and the general public; and
(c) to satisfy the responsible authority that tht interests of any other person
having an interest in the land will not be adv >rsely affected.
Reasons for decisions
42. After a responsible authority has reached a deci iion on a licence application, it
must promptly—
(u) notify the applicant and any person who has ~bjected to the application; and
(b) at the request of any person contemplated in paragraph (u), give written
reasons for its decision.
Part 8: Compulsory licences for water use in re :pect of speci$c resource
This Part establishes a procedure for a respot sible authority to undertake
compulsory licensing of any aspect of water use in respect of one or more water
resources within a specific geographic area.
It includes requirements for a
responsible authorz”ty to prepare schedules for allo cati”ng quantities of water to
existing and new users. The procedure is intended to be used in areas which are, or
are soon likely to be, under “water stress” ffor exampl  ?, where the demands for water
are approaching or exceed the available supply, wht re water quality problems are
imminent or already exist, or where the water resoui ce quality is under threat,), or
5
IO
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 31 ---

Act N(). 36, 1998
N,X1”[ONA1. ~’~1”~ < ~[’T, 19°8
where it is necessary to review prevailing water live to achieve equity of access to
water.
la such cases the responsible authority mast publi h a notice in the Gazette and
other appropriate media, requiring people to apply. for ‘icences in the designated area.
~ippliconts ma-v be required to submit additional i, !formation, and may also he
required to undertake an environmental or other asse isment, which assess tnent may
be sahject to independent review.
In determining the quantities of water to be allm ated to users, the responsible
authority must consider all applications received, ant r draw up a schedule detailing
how’ the available water will be allocated among the applicants. In drawing up an
allocation schedule the responsible authority must co nply w’ith the plans, strategies
and criteria set out elsewhere in the Act and must give, pecial consideration to certain
categories of applicants. A responsible authority uee(’ not allocate all the available
w’ater in a water resource, and may reserve sotne ( f the water for future need.~.
Provision is also tnade for any water still available after the requirements (!f the
Reserve, international obligations and corrective actio. 1 have been met to be allocated
on the basis {!fpablic auction or tender. A system ojobj ection.s  and appeals in relation
to proposed and preliminary allocation schedules eusu res that Iicences may be issued
only after the allocation schedule has been jinalised.
I.iceuces issued under this Part replace previous eut tlements to any existing lawfhl
water use bmv the applicant.
Compulsory iicence applications
43. ( I ) II it is desiroble that water use in rcspec( ot’onc or more water resources within
a specilic gcograpbic  area bc licensecl-—
((/) l();lchicve af;iirtlli()c:lticJn (~ fw:lter fr()tll:l  w:lterres(>Llrcc  itlacc(~rdilrlce with
secti(m 45—
(i) which i\ Ltlldcr w:llcrstrcss:t)r
(ii) whenil  isneccssar  ytorevie wprevailini w:lteruse t(~:lchie\ee c]uityitl
allocations;
(h) t{)pr(ltTl(Jte  betlefici:ll tlsef)l  \v:ller inlhepllb ic interest;
((’) lof:ici]it;llcef~iciellt Ill:irl:lgeme[lt ofthcw:ite’ resol[rce; or
(d) topr(~tcct water resource quality,
Itw rcsp(lllsihie tlllthority may issue anolice  requiring p?rsonstoappiy  Iorliccnces  for
(me or more types of wate ruse contemplated in section 21.
(2) A notice in terms of subsection ( I ) must-
(</) identify thew:lterr esollrcc: lnci[llew’[itcruse  inqutstion:
(h) s[ate\vherc liccllce ~tpplic:lti(>tl fornlsl n;iybeobt:lined;
[() st;ltettle:lddress  t()wtlich licellce applic:lti()n mllstbes  ubtllitted:
(d) state theclosing  date lorlicence:tpplications:
(c) st:~[ethe:lpplic[lti(~ll  Ice: and
(,/) c(mtain such other inlormati(m as the re;ponsihk  authority considers
appr(ylriale.
(3) Anotice interms  ofsubsection  (l)mustbenlacle :nownbypuhlishin gthenotice
in the (;a:cI/e  at least 60 days before the closing cate. giving suitable notice in
newspapers and other media and taking other steps to bring the notice to the attention of
inlcrcsttxl persons.
(4) Section 4 I applies to an tipplication in terms of t Iis section as it’ the application
haLI been made in terms of that sccti(m.
Late applications
44. A responsible authority may, for good reason, c andone a late application and
charge a reasonable additional fee for processing the Iat t application.
Proposed allocation schedules
5
10
Is
Z()
25
30
35
40
45
50
45. ( 1 ) A responsible authority must, after considering, :—


--- PAGE 32 ---

f,?
N(1. 191X2
GOVE {NMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATEF ACT, 1998
(a) all applications received in response to the pu’ JIication of a notice in terms of
section 43( i );
(b) any further information or assessment ohtaim d; and
(c) the factors contemplated in section 27,
prepare a proposed allocation schedule specifying how v ‘ater from the water resource in
question will be allocated.
(2) A proposed allocation schedule must, subject to sul)section (3), reflect the quantity
of water to be—
(a) assigned to the Reserve and any relevant inte national obligations;
(b) assigned to meet the requirements of existing Iicences;
(c) allocated to each of the applicants to whom Iicences ought to be issued in
order to redress the results of past racial and gender discrimination in
accordance with the constitutional mandate f( r water reform;
(d) allocated to each of the applicants exercisirq existing lawful water uses to
whom the licensing authority determines that licences should be issued;
(e) allocated to each of the applicants, taking int J account the factors set out in
section 27; and
[~) allocated to every other applicant by public k rider or auction, subject to any
regulation made under section 26( I )(n).
(3) A responsible authority is under no obligation to allocate all available water.
(4) After completing a proposed allocation schedule the responsible authority must
publish a notice in the &/ze/te-
(fl) containing a copy of the proposed schedule, x stating the address where it
may be inspected;
(b) inviting written objections to be submitte,l on the proposed schedule,
specifying an address to which the ob.jectimrs are to be submitted and
specifying a date before which the objections we to be submitted, which date
must be not less than 60 days after the date o‘ publication of the notice; and
(c) must consider what further steps, if any, are al )propriate  to bring the contents
of the notice to the attention of interested pers ms, and take those steps which
the responsible authority considers to be appr )priate.
Preliminary allocation schedules
46. ( 1 ) After considering all objections received on the proposed allocation schedule
on or before the date specified in the notice contel nplated in section 45(4), the
responsible authority must prepare a preliminary allo+:ation schedule and publish a
notice in the Gazette—
([t) containing a copy of the preliminary allot ~tion schedule, or stating the
address where it may be inspected; and
(b) stating that an appeal in respect of any \ msuccessful objection to the
preliminary allocation schedule may be made n accordance with Chapter 15.
(2) If an appeal under subsection ( 1 )(b) succeeds. I he responsible authority must
amend the preliminary allocation schedule as directed k y the Water Tribunal.
Final allocation schedule
47. ( 1 ) A preliminary allocation schedule becomes a inal allocation schedule—
(a) (i) if no appeal is lodged within the time Iinlit;
(ii) if it has been amended following every s Jccessful appeal; or
(iii) if every appeal lodged is dismissed; and
(b) on publication by the responsible authority of a notice in the Gazette—
(i) stating that a preliminary allocation sche iule has become final; and
(ii) containing a copy of the final allocation : chedule, or stating the address
where it may he inspected.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 33 ---

(>4
N(I I{)IX2
(;OVE <NMEN’T GAZITII.  ?6 A(lG(lST [998
id No. 36. 1’)98
NATIONAI. WKI’Et ACT. 1998
( 2 )  A  resp(msibie authority mus[, as
soon as n asotmbly practicable after a
prelinlinar’y
allocati(m schedule hecomcs final, issl e Iicences a c c o r d i n g  l{) Itm
allocalitms prx)vided l~)r in it.
IJicences replace previous entitlements
48. (l) Anyiicellce  isslied pllrslttln( t{~llnapplic:ltit)r ccrntemplated insection43(lJ
rcpliiccs:~ny cxistir~g lawful w:lter~]se ctltitlclllcll( (~fth:t person in respect of the water
use in question.
(2) Nt)twitllst:indi rlgt}lep r(~visit~nst )f`sccti()t14,r lt)p'rs()nt(  Jwh()lllagener:]l notice
to apply fora liccnce has been directed in terms of sect on 43 in respect of an existing
lawful waler use mayexcrciset  hat watcrusc-
(u) after the closing date stated in (he notice if lhat person did not apply t’or a
Iicencr: (Jr
(h) alierthc Iiceilce:tpplic;itit)n  hasbmm Iinally disposed of, if that person did
apply for a Iicencc.
Part 9: Kevie w and renewal of licences, and atneti dtnent and substitution of
conditions oj’[icences
i“his Part deals u'itlttlle  review atldrejtewal  t~flice tce.v, altdtlte atnertdi?tettt  atld
.snbstitutian of their conditions. Review of a Iicence ~s by the relevant re,sprtnsibie
authority, at periods stipulated in the licence as part o f a general review process.
A review of a licence may tead to the amendment m substitution qf its conditions,
but only (f certain requirements are satis@ed. If the unendment  or substitution qf
conditions severely prejudices the econotnic  viability (q ‘any undertaking in respect of
wh ieh the licence was issued there is a claim f(w compe lsation. Minor amendments to
iicences @r instance, to correct clerical mistakes, or ‘hanges  in format), and ti~o.se
agreed to b.v the licensee may lte made outside of the review process. In addition, a
licensee may apply to the responsible authority for th ? renewal or amendment of a
licence before it expires. In considering such appr’icat tans the responsible authority
must again consider the matters dealt with in the iniiial application, and there are
limitations to the new cottditians to which the Iicence $wa.v be subjected.
Review and amendment of licences
49. ( 1 ) A responsible authority may review a lic~ nce only at the time periods
stipulated fr~r [hat purpose in the Iicencc.
(2) on revir\ving a liccncc, a resptmsihlc :Iuth(wity n ay amend any condition of the
liccnce, other than the period thercol. il—
([{ ) it is necessary or desirable to prevent deterior ttion or further deteriorate ion of
the quality of the water resource;
(h) there is insutlicient water in the water resource to accommodate all wrthoriseci
water uses after all[)wing tor IIW Reserve and international obligations; or
(c) it is necessary or desirable to accomrnocht ? demands brought atxmt by
changes in s(}ci(~-ecoll{)tllic circumstances+ ar d it is in the public interest to
meet those ciernands.
(3) An amendtnent contemplated in subsection (2) ma: only be made if the c(~nditions
[JI other licences Ior similar water use from the same watv - resource in the same \icinit  y.
all as deter[nined  by the responsible authority. have crlsc been amended in an equitable
manner through a geneml review process.
(4) It an anlendmen[  of a Iicence condition on n view severely prejudices Ihe
ectm(]mic viability of any urrdertakitlg  in respect of wh ch the Iicence was issued, the
provisions 0!’ section 22(6) t(} ( 10) apply.
(5) A responsible authority must a[l’{)rd the licensee an opportunity to be heard before
alncn ding any Iicence condition on review.
5
[()
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 34 ---

oh
N(1. 101X2
GOVE  RN KIENT G.AZETTE.  26 AUGUST 1998
Act so. 36, 1998
NATIONAI. w,4mm ACT, 1998
Formal amendment of’ Iictmces
50. ( 1 )
((1)
(A)
((’)
A respot]siblc  authority  may amend or substitute a licence conclition—
if’ tlw Iiccnsee or successor-in-title has consented to or requested the
atllcminwnt or substitution;
to rctlect one or more succc\wrs-in-title as new licensees; and
5
[() chirn~e the description of’ (he property to which the Iicence applies, if the
y)
propert~  described in the licenc~ h& b~en subdivided or consolidated with
other properly.
(2) The responsible aulhority may require the licensee—
((I) to obtuin the written consent of any affected person bef’ore amending or 10
substituting (he Iiccnce; f)r
(b) to make a formal application for the amendment or substitution in terms of’
section 52;
(.? ) A responsible truthorily  may only wncnd or substitute a licencc condition under
this wcli{m it” it is salisficd tha-
[5
((~) the amendment or suhslitu[ion will nol have a significant detrimental impac[
on the wtiter res(wrce: and
(l)) the inlermls of any other person are no[ adversely affected. unless that person
has conscn[cLl thcrct{).
Successors-in-title
51. ( 1 ) A re.sp(msible  authority may, after giving all parties an opportunity to be heard,
adjudicate upon convicting claims between a ficensee and a successor-in-title. ol-
between ditierent successors-in-title, in respect of claims for the timendment or
substitution of licerwe conditions.
(2) A successor-in-title of any person to whom a ficence to use water has been 25
issued—
(a) may, subject to the conditions of the relevant Iicence and paragraph (b),
continue with the water use; and
(b) must promptly int’orm the responsible authority of’ the succession, for the
substitution of the mrme of’ the licensee, for the remainder of’ the term.
30
Procedure for earlier renewal or amendment of Iicences
52. ( 1 ) A licensee may. before the expiry date of’ a Iicence, appfy to the responsible
authority k)r [be rencwat or amendment of’ the ficence.
(2) Unless an application for the renewal or amendment of’ a Iicence is nude in terms
of’ section 50, it rnusl—
35
(a) be made in such torn], contain such information tind be accompanied by such
processing fee as may be determined by the responsible authority; and
(/)) be dealt with according to the procedure as set out in section 41.
(3) In considering an application to amend or rerww a licence, tfw responsible
au[fmri(y must h:lve regard (() (Iw same mat(ers which it wus required to consider when 40
deciding the ioitiaf application for that Iicxnce.
(4) A responsible uuthority may mend any condition of’ a Iicence by irgreement  \vitb
Ilw Iicemsee.
Part 10: Contravention of or failure to comply with authorisations
Ibis Part deals with the consequences of contravention of licence conditions. 45
lhese range jrom the responsible authority requiring the licensee to take remedial
action, jailing which it may take the necessary action and recover reasonable costs
,from that person, to the suspension or withdrawal of a licence. Where a licensee offers
to surrender a licenee the responsible authority is obliged to accept the surrender and
cancel the licence unless there is good reason jbr refusal.
5[)


--- PAGE 35 ---

08
No. 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NKIIONAL WATER  ACT, 1998
Rectification of contravention
53. ( [ ) A responsible authority may, by notice in writing to a person who
conlruvenes-
(({) any provision of this Chapter;
(b) a requirement set or directive given by the responsible authority under this 5
Chtipter; or
(c) a condition which applies to any authority to use water,
direct tha[ person, or the owner of the property in relation to which the contmvention
occurs, to take any action specified in the notice to rectify the contravention, within the
time (being not less than two working days) specitied in the notice or any other longer 10
time allowed by the responsible authority.
(2) If the action is not taken within the time specified in the notice, or any longer time
allowed, the responsible authority nMy-
(a) carry out any works and take any other action necessary to rectify the
contravention ml recover its reasonable costs from the person on whom the 15
notice was served; or
(b) apply to a competent court for appropriate relief.
Suspension or withdrawal of entitlements to use water
54. ( 1 ) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), a responsible authority may by notice to any
person entitled to use water under this Act suspend or withdraw the entitlement if the 20
person fails—
(a) to comply with any condition of the entitlement;
(b) to comply with this Act; or
(c) to pay a churge which is payable in terms of Chapter 5.
(2) An entitlement may be suspended under subsection ( 1 )—
25
(a) for the period specified in the notice of suspension; or
(b) until the responsible authority is satisfied that the person concerned has
rectitied the failure which led to the suspension.
(3) A responsible authority may only suspend or withdraw an entitlement under
subsection ( 1 ) if the responsible authority has directed the person concerned to take 30
specified steps to rectify the failure within a specified period, and the person concerned
has failed to do so to the satisfaction of the responsible authority.
(4) The person concerned must be given an opportunity to make representations,
within a retisonable period, on any proposed suspension or withdrawal of an entitlement
to use water.
35
(5) A responsible authority may, for good reason, reinstate an entitlement withdrawn
under subsection ( I).
Surrender of Iicence
55. ( I ) A licensee may otl-er to surrender any Iicence issued to that licensee under this
Chitpter, whereupon, unless there is good reason not to do so, the responsible authority 40
must accept the surrender und cancel the licence.
(~) A responsible ~uthorl[y  may refund to a ]icensee any charge or part of any charge
paid in respect of a Iicence surrendered under subsection ( I).
CHAPTER 5
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
45
This Chapter deals with the measures to jinance  the provision of water resource
management services as well as jinancial  and economic measures to support the
implementation of strategies aimed at water resource protection, conservation of
water and the beneficial use of water.


--- PAGE 36 ---

70
N() 19182
(GOVERNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUG(JST  1998
Act No. 36.1998
NATIONAL. WATER ACT, 1998
Part I : Water use charges
In terms of Part 1 the Minister may from time to time, after public consultation,
establish a pricing strategy which may differentiate among geographical areas,
categories of water users or individual water users. The achievement of social equity
is one qf the considerations in setting differentiated charges. Water use charges are to 5
be used to fund the direct and related costs of water resource management,
development and use, and may also be used to achieve an equitable and eficieut
allocation of water. In addition, they may also be used to ensure compliance with
prescribed standards and water management practices according to the user pays and
polluter pays principles. Water use charges will be used as a means of encouraging 10
reduction in waste, and provision is made for incentives for effective and eficient
water use. Non-payment of water use charges will attract penalties, including the
possible restriction or suspension of water supply from a waterwork or of an
authorisation to use water.
Pricing strategy for water use charges
15
56. ( 1 ) The Minister may, with the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance, from time
to time by notice in the Gazerre, establish a pricing strategy for charges for any water use
within the framework of existing relevant government policy.
(2) The pricing stmtegy may contain a strategy for setting water use charges—
(u) for funding water resource management, including the related costs of—
(i) gathering information;
(ii) monitoring water resources and their use;
(iii) controlling water resources;
(iv) wuter resource protection, including the discharge of waste tind the
protection of the Reserve; and
(v) water conservation;
(b) for funding water resource development and use of waterworks, including-
(i) the costs of investigation and planning;
(ii) the costs of design and construction;
(iii) pre-financing of development;
(iv) the costs of operation and maintenance of waterworks;
(v) a return on assets; and
(vi) the costs of water distribution; and
(c) for achieving the equitable and eflicient allocation of water.
(3) The pricing strategy may-
(a) differentiate on an equitable basis between—
(i) different types of geographic areas;
(ii) ditferent categories of water use; and
(iii) dilferent water users;
(b) provide for charges to be paid by either—
(i) MI appropriate water management institution; or
(ii) consumers directly;
(c) provide for the basis of establishing charges;
(d) provide for a rebate for water returned to a water resource; and
(e) provide cm an equitable basis for some elements of the charges to be waived
in respect of specific users for a specified period of time.
(4) The pricing strategy may ditierentiate under subsection (3)(a)-
(U) in respect of ditlerent geographic areas, on the basis of-
(i) socio-economic  aspects within the area in question;
(ii) dw physical attributes of each mew and
(iii) the demographic attributes of each area;
(b) in respect of ditierent types of water uses, on the basis of—
20
30
35
-K)
45
50


--- PAGE 37 ---

72
N() 1{)182
(; OVERNNIENT  GAZETTE. 26 AUG(JST  1998
,\cl N(). 36. 1998
,NATIONA1. WATER  Acr. 199x
( i )  (llclll:l!irlcr irlwhich [hewuter  istuken.  supplie(l,  dischtirgecl  ()rdisp()scd
01’:
(ii) whether thcose isc[)ilsulnplive  orllt)[l-col]sulllptive:
( i i i )  tlletissur:tllcc:lr)  clreliabili{y  ofslJl)ply:trld  wuter quality;
( i v )  [hecll’eclofrc(urn  !Iowsollti  waterrc  source;”
(v) [he extent ot’the benetit  to he derived Irom the devel[)pmcnt  ota new
water resource;
(vi)  the class and resource quality objectives o!’ the waler  r e s o u r c e  i n
question; and
(vii) therequircd  quality oftbewatert  obe{[sed;and
(c) inrespect  ot’different  water users, onthe basis of-
(i) theextent  of their water use;
(ii) thequantity  ot’water returned bythem  toa water resource;
(iii) their economic circumstances; trnd
(iv) thestutistical  probability of thesupply  ofwater  to them.
(5) The pricing strategy may provide for a differential rate for waste discharges,
taking into accounl-
(~t) {hecharacteristic  sotthewast edischtirged;
(b) thetill]t)ullt alldquzllity (~ fthewaste dischtirged;
(c) lhetlattlrc:iild  cxtcntoft heit~lpactonti”  water resource caused bythe waste
discharged;
(d) the extent o!’ permitted deviation from prescribed waste standards or
mamtgement prtictices; find
({’) tbercqllired  extc[lt tindnatllre oflnollitoring  the water use.
(6) In setting apricing  strategy for water usecharges,[hc  Ministe[-—
((~) must consider the class and resource quality objectives fordi!ferwnt  water
resources;
(b) may consider incentives and disincentives—
(i) to promote the efficient use and beneficial use of water;
(ii) to reduce detrimental impacts on water resources; and
(iii) to prevent the waste ot’ water; and
(() must consider metisures necessary to support the establishment of [aritfs by
wtitdr services au[boritics in terms of section 10 of the Water Services Ac(.
1997 (Act No. 10801’ 1997), and the LISC of lifeline tariffs tind progressive
block taritfs.
(7) Before setting a pricing strategy for water use charges under subsection ( I), the
Minister must-
(a) publish a notice in the Ga;e[[e-
(i) setting out the proposed pricing strategy; and
(ii) inviting written comments to be submitted on the proposed strategy.
specifying an address to which and a date before which the comments tire
to be submitted, which date may not be earlier thtin 90 days after
publication of the notice;
(b) consider what t’urther s[eps, if any, tire appropriate to bring the contents of the
notice to the attention of interested persons, wd take those steps which (Iw
Minister considers to be appropriate; am.1
(c) consider all comlnents received on or before the date specified in the notice.
Application of pricing strategy
5
lo
57. ( 1 ) W~ter use charges—
(a) may be made-
(i) within u specitic wutcr management drew or
(ii) on a national or regional btisis; tind
(/7) must be made in accordance with the pricing strategy for wuter use charges set
by the Minister.
(2) Charges made within a speci(ic water rnarmgernent  area may be made by and are
payable to the relevant water management institution.
(3) Charges made on a national or regiomd  basis—
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 38 ---

74
N,). 101X2
(; OVI. RNKIENT [;/\ ZETTE. 2fI AllGl)ST 199X
—
Act No. 36. 1998
N/\Tlo  NAl.  W.KIE  < ACT. 199S
(a) may be made by the Minister and are payabi; to the state: and
(h) may bc apportioned between dif~ereot water management areas according to
the extent of the specific benctits which each water management area derives
m will derive from the water uses for which the charges are made,
(4) Any person liable to puy water charges to a w’at( r services institution as defined 5
in the Water Services Act, 1997 (Act No. 108 of 199’
7), for water supply ser\ices  or
sanitation services may not be charged for those servicas in terms of this Act.
(5) No charge made under this Act may be ot’ sac h a nature as to constitute the
imposition of a tax, levy or duty.
Recovery of water use charges
I o
5S. ( 1 ) The Minister may direct any water manage nent institution to recover any
charges for water use made by the Minister under set tion 57( I )(a) from water users
within its water management area or area of operation, as the case may be.
(2) A water management institution which has been directed to recover any such
charges may retain such portion of all charges recover[:d  in order to recompense it for 15
expenses and losses, as the Minister may allow.
(3) A water management institution which has been directed to recover any such
charges—
(u) is jointly and severally liable to the state witt the water users concerned: and
(b) may recover any amounts paid by it in terms .]f puragraph ((~ ) from the water 20
users concerned.
Liability for water use charges
S!). ( I ) Water use charges contemplated in this Chaper-
(t~) may only be made in respect of a water use i o which a person is voluntarily
committed: and
25
(b) must bear a direct relationship to the water u ,e in question.
(2) Any person registered in terms of a regulation under section 26 or holding a
Iicence to use water must pay all charges imposed unf er section 57 in respect of that
water use.
(3) If a water use charge is not paid—
30
(a) interest is payable during the period of defarrl at a rate determined from time
to time by the Minister, with the concurrence{ of the Minister of Finance, by
notice in the Gazette; and
(b) the supply of water to the water user from a w aterwork or the authorisation to
use water may be restricted or suspended until the charges, together with 35
interest. have been paid.
(4) A person must be given an opportunity to I lake representations within a
reasonable period on any proposed restriction or susp msion before the restriction or
suspension is imposed.
(5) Where there is a fixed charge, a restriction or susp msion does not relieve a person 40
of the obligation to pay the charges due for the period of the restriction or suspension.
(6) A person whose water use is restricted or susper ded for any lawful reason tnay
not later claim the water to which that person would otht rwise have been entitled during
the period of restriction or suspension,
Water use charges are charges on land
60. ( I ) A charge made in terms 01 sec(ion 57( I ). inclu Jing any interest. is a char:c tm
the land t~l which the water use relates and is recoverable from the current owner ~~f the
land without releasing any other person who may be Ii: ble for the charge.
(2) The Minister or relevant water management inst tution must—
((I) on written application by any person; and
(/)) within 30 days of the application,
‘$5
50


--- PAGE 39 ---

76
N(), 19182
GOVE RNMENT GAZE’ETE,  26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. M. 1998
NATIONAL W’ATEI : ACT, 1998
issue a certificate stating the amount ot’ any unpaid wate charges and any interest due in
respect of any land.
(3) If a certificate is not issued within the period of 30 days, the provisions of
subsection ( I ) cease to apply to that property, notwiths anding section 66.
Part 2: Financial assistan ce
5
Part 2 deals with jinancial  assistance, which n ~ay be granted once certain
considerations are taken into account.
Financial assistance by Minister
61. ( I ) The Minister may, subject to a regulation made under section 62, give financial
assistance to any person for the purposes of this Act, i lcluding assistance for making 10
Iicence applications, in the form of grants, loans or subsidies, which may be made
subject to such conditions as the Minister may determitle.
(2) The financial assistance must be from funds—
(o) appropriated by Parl iarnent; or
(b) which may under this Act or otherwise Iawfl Ily be used for the purposes in 15
question.
(3) Before giving any financial assistance, the Minister must take into account all 1
relevant considerations, including—
(a) the need for equity;
(b,J the need for transparency;
Z()
(c) the need for redressing the results of past rat] al and gender discrimination;
(d) the purpose of the financial assistance;
(e) the financial position of the recipient: and
(H the need for water resource protection.
(4) A person who wilfully fails to comply with any obligations imposed by this Act is 25
not eligible for financial assistance under this Act.
Regulations on financial assistance
62. The Minister may make regulations concerning–
(a) the eligibility for financial assistance;
(h) the manner in which financial assistance mus be applied for; and
(c) terms and conditions applicable to any financ al assistance granted.
30
CHAPTER 6
GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF MINISTER AND
DIRECTOR-GENERA] 
/
Part 1: Delegations, directives, expropriation, condo)  *ation  and additional powers 35
Part I of this Chapter sets out various powers and di ties of the Minister which are
of a general nature, such as the powers of delegt tion and expropriation, and
intervention in lifi”gah”on.  More speci$c powers and dui ies are dealt with elsewhere in
the Act.
Delegation of powers and duties by Minister
63. ( 1 ) The Minister may, in writing and subject to cc nditions, delegate a power and
duty vested in the Minister in terms of this Act to-
(u) an official of the Department by name;
(b) the holder of an office in the Department;
(c) a water management institution;
(d) an advisory committee established under sectj on 99; or
40
45


--- PAGE 40 ---

78
IN(), l~)lx?
G(IV1 RN NIENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGIJST 199X
Act NO. 36, 1998
NATIONAL W’ATE t ACT. 1998
(e) a water board as defined in section I of the Water Ser\ices  Act, 1997 (Act
No 108 of 1997).
(2) The Minister may not delegate the power—
(u) [omake  a regulation;
(h) to authorise a water management institution to expropriate under section
64( 1):
(() to appoint a melmber of the governing boarj  of a catchmeot management
agency; or
(d) toappoint  amemher  of the Water Tribunal.
(3) The Minister may, in writing and subject to cond tions, permit a person to whom
a power c~r duty has been delegated to delegate that (UI ction to another person.
(4) The Minister may give u directive to the Dire Xor-General in rekrtion IL) the
exercise of’ any of the Director-General’s powers c r perftwmance of any of the
Director-General’s duties, inctuding any power dclegat xl to the Director-General.
(5) The Director-General mmt give elfcct to a direct ve in terms of subsection (4).
Expropriation of property
64. ( I ) The Minister, or o water management instituti m uuthorised by the Minister in
writing, may expropriate any property for any purpose contemplated in this Act. if that
purpose is a public purpose or is in the public interest.
(2) Subject to this Act, the Expropriation Act. 1975 ( 4ct No, 63 of 1975). applies to
all expropriations in terms of this Act.
(3) Where the Minister expropriates any property u lder this Act, any reference to
“Minister’” in the Expropriation Act, 1975, must be construed m being a reference to the
Minister.
(4) Where any water management institution exproI riates property
any reference to “Minister” and “State” in the Exp “opriation Act,
regarded as being a reference to that water managemen. institution.
Expropriation for rehabilitation and other remedial work
under this Act,
1975. must be
65. ( I ) If a person who is required under this Act to undertake rehabilitation or other
remedial work on the land of another. reasonably requir(s access to thtit land in order to
elfect the reh;ibiiitation or remedial work, but is unable o acquire access on reasonable
terms, the Minister may—
(o) expropriate the necessary rights in respect of that land for the benefit of the
person undertaking the rehabilitation or remedial work, who will then be
vested with the expropriated rights; and
(/J) recover all costs incurred in connection with t le expropriation, including any
compensation payable, from the person for v ‘hose benefit the expropriation
was effected.
(2) Where a servitude of abutment, aqueduct or submt rsion is expropriated under this
section. the Minister or water management institution rt sponsible for the exprx~priation
has the same rights as those vesting in the holder of a s ;rvitude under section 128.
Condonation of failure to comply with time period
66, The Minister may, in exceptional circumstances : nd for a good reason. extend a
time period or condone a failure to comply with a time period.
Dispensing with certain requirements of Act
67. ( 1 ) [n an emergency situation. or in cases of extrer le urgency invol\ing  the satety
of hunla)]s or property or the prt]tection of ii Wiiter re~ :mrce or the environment, the
Minister nlay-
5
1()
Is
20
25
30
35
40
45


--- PAGE 41 ---

xl)
N{) 1018?
(;OV[ RNMENT  GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WKI’EI  : ACT, 1998
(a) dispense with the requirements of this Act re sting to prior publication or to
obtaining und considering public comment l~elore any instrument contem-
plated in section 158(I) is made m issued:
(h) dispense with notice periods or time’ limits required by or under this Act:
(c) authorise a water management institution to f ispense with—
s
(i) the requirements of this Act relating to F rim publication or to obtaining
and considering public comment befo e any instrument is made or
issued; and
(ii) notice periods or time limits required by or under this Act.
(2) Anything done under subsection ( 1 )—
1 ()
(a) must be withdrawn or repealed within a max mum period of two years after
the emergency situation or the urgency cease; to exist; and
(b) must be mentioned in the Minister’s annual r :port to Parliament.
Intervention in litigation
68. The Minister may intervene in litigation before a court or in a hearing before the 15
Water Tribunal with regard to any matter contemplated in this Act,
Part 2: Genera! provisions regardin,;  regulations
Part 2 requires the Minister to consult with the public when making regulations
under this Act, and also to submit regulations for scrl tiny by the National Assembly
and by the National Council of Provinces. If the National Assembly rejects a 20
regulation it must be repealed or amended.
Making of regulations
69. ( 1 ) The Minister must, before making any regul:ltions under this Act—
(a} publish a notice in the Ga:erre-
(i) setting out the dmft regulations; and
25
(ii) inviting written comments to be submitted on the proposed regulations,
specifying an address to which and a d: te before which the comments
must be submitted, which date may net be earlier than 60 days after
publication of the notice;
(b) consider what further steps, if any, are approp iate to bring the contents of the 30
notice to the attention of interested persons, and take those steps which the
Minister considers to be appropriate; and
(c) consider all comments received on or before the date specified in paragraph
(a)(ii): and
(d) on request by the National Assembly or the National Council of Provinces or 35
a committee of the National Assembly or the National Council of Provinces
report the extent to which a specific comment has been taken into account, or
if a comment was not taken into account, prx vide the reason why it was not
taken into account.
(2) Any regulation made under this Act may provide t lat a contravention of or failure 40
to comply with a regulation is an offence and that any person found guilty of the otfence
is liable to a fine or to imprisonment for a period not e :ceeding 5 years.
Consideration of regulations
70. ( I ) The Minister must, within 30 days after makin; : any regulations under this Act,
table the regulations in the National Assembly and the N uional Council of Provinces for 45
consideration.
(2) In considering regulations—
(c{) tabled in the National Assembly. a committee of the National Assembly must
consider and report to the National Assembly, and


--- PAGE 42 ---

82
N() l~)lx?
GO\’ERNMENT  GAZETtTi 26 AIJGUST  1998
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT. 1998
(b) tubled in the Ndtionul Council ot’ Provinces, a committee of the National
Council ot’ Provinces must consider and report to the National Council of
Provinces,
whether the reguliitions-
(i) are consistent with the purposes of this Act;
( ii) are within the powers conferred by this Act;
( iii) are consistent with the Constitution; and
(i\) require clarification.
(3) The Nationul  Council of Provinces may reject regulations tabled before the
National Council of Provinces in terms of subsection ( 1 ) within 14 days after the date on
which the re,goia[ions were so [ubled. and should the National Council of Provinces
rc,jec[ tiny regulation.
(he rejection must be referred to the National Assembly for
ct)]]sideri]tif~n.
(4) The National Assembly may, not later than the lwentieth sitting clay of the
National Assenlbly ;{fler the date on which the regulations were tubled and at”ier
c~)i]sidcring  any rcjcu[i(m 01 a regulation by the Nmional Council ot’ Provinces, reject
those rcgulali[ms
( S ) [f tbc Nati(mal Assembly or the Na~ion:d Council of p r o v i n c e s  rcjecls ;my
rcgulalit)ns, it must state its retisons.
Itejected regulations
71. ( I ) The Minister must, within 30 days after being inkmned in writing that the
National Assembly has rejected any regulations, repeal or amend those regulations so tis
[o address the matters raised by the Nutiorml Assembly.
(2) Any regulations rejected by the National Assembly remain in force until repealed
or umended.
Part 3: Powers relating to catchrnent  management agencies
The Minister has the responsibility to manage and authorise the use of the nation’s
water resources. This means that the Minister fuljils  the functions of a catchment
managetnent agency in a water management area for which no catchment
management agency is established, or where such an agency has been established but
is not functional. The Minister may dispense with certain requirements of this Act for
as long as is necessary to deal with an urgent situation or an emergency.
Powers and duties of catchment  management agencies vest in Minister in certain
circumstances
72. ( I ) In areas for which a catchment management agency is not established or, it’
established, is not functional, all powers and duties of a catchment management agency,
including those powers and duties described in sections 79 and 80 and in Schedule 3.
vest in the Minister,
(2) in areas for which a catchmen( management agency is established, those powers
tind duties described in Schedule 3 which have not been assigned by the Minister to the
c;ltchment munagemen[ ugency, vest in the Minister.
Assignment of powers and duties to catchment management agencies
73. ( 1 ) The Minister may, after consultation with the c~tchment management ugency
concerned. by notice in [he Ca;etre. assign to that catchment management agency—
([[) a po\ver or duty ot’ u responsible authority; and
(l)) any power or duty listed in Schedule ~.
(2) [n iissignin,g :tny power or duty under subsection ( I), the Minister nmy -
(~~) iimi[ [he at-ca w i[hin which an assigned power may be exercised or duty may
be performed: and
(b) attirch conditions to that assignment,
13) t3cltwc asiignjng a power or duty to a catchment mwmgement tigency under
subsection ( ] ). lbe Minisicr must consider-
5
I ()
Is
Z()
15
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 43 ---

X4
N{) 191x2
(; OVIRNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AIJGIIST 1998
Act ho. 36, 1998
NATIONAL W’A’IER ACT. 199X
(~~) the capticity ol’ [he catchment mmrgement  rrgency to exercise the power or
perform the duty; and
(b) lbc clcsirability 01’ tissigning Ihirt power or duty.
(4) The Minister must promote the management of water resources at the catchment
management  level by assigning powers and duties to catchment rnanagerntmt  agencies 5
v hen it is desirable to do so.
I)irectives  to water management institutions
74. ( 1 ) The Minister may give a directive to a water mana&en~ent  institution in
relirtion to (he exercise oftrny of the institution’s powers or the performance of any of the
institution’s duties, including any power or duty assigned orde]egated to that institution.
10
(~) The Minister lnust give ~~ water Inan:lge[llent  institution not less than }~ days’
notice of the Minister’s intention to give a directive under subsection ( 1 ) if it relates to
any assigned power or duty, and must allow the institution an opportunity to comment.
(3) Every directive, or a summary thereof, given to a water management institution by
the Minister and which relates to an assigned power or duty—
15
(a) must be published by the Minister in the Gazette; and
(b) must be included in the annual report of the institution.
(4) A Lrilrrre to comply with subsection (3) does not atfect the validity of the directive.
(5) A water management institution must give etiect to a directive given to it by the
Minister under subsection (1).
20
Part 4: Powers of Director-General
I)elegation of powers by Director-General
75. The Director-Genmrl  may, for the purposes of this Act, in writing and subject to
conditions, delegate a power,
including a power granted or delegated to the
Direclor-Geneml  under this Act, to-
25
(u) an o(liciat of the Department by name;
(b) the holder of an ofiice in the Department; or
([) a waler mmagernent institution.
Appointment of persons on contract
76. ( I ) The Director-General may, when necessary, appoint employees on contmct 30
outside the provisions ot’ ibc Public Scr\’ice Act, 1994 (Proclamation No, 103 of 1994).
(2) Appointments mode under subsection ( i ) must be limited to persons to perform
duties at sites where the Department-
(c~,l is engaged in tictutrl construction or investigatory work; or
(b) is associtited wilh specifrc  projects relating to actual  c o n s t r u c t i o n  o r  3 5
investigfitory work.
(3) The Director-General must, from time to time, and after consultation with the
Department of Public Service and Administrfition, determine the conditions of
employment of such employees.
(4) Such employees shall be remunerated from money tippropriated for that purpose 40
by Parliament.
CHAPTER 7
CATCHMENT  MANAGEMENT AGENCIES
This Chapter provides ftm the progressive establishment by the Minister of
catchment management agencies. The purpose of establishing these agencies is to 45
delegate water resource management to the regional or catchment level and to involve
local communities, within the framework of the national water resource strategy


--- PAGE 44 ---

X6
N(I 19182
(; OVEKN\lt7NT  (i AZE17’E,  26 AIJ(;LIS”l’  1998
Act No. 36, 19!)8
NAT1ONAI.  WATER AL-T, 1998
established in terms of Chapier  2. Whilst the ultimate aitn is to estabiish  catchment
management agencies for all water management areas, the Minister acts as the
catchment management agency where one has not been established. Where the
necessary capacity does not exist to establish a catchrnent  management agency, an
advisory committee may be appointed under Chapter 9 to develop the necessary
capacity as a jirst step towards establishing an agency.
Part I: Establishment and powers of catchment management agencies
Under Part 1 a catchment management agency may be established for a specijic
water management area, after public consultation, on the initiative of the community
and stakeholders concerned. In the absence of such a proposal the Minister may
establish a catchment management agency on the Minister’s own initiative. The
provisions of Schedule 4, on institutional and management planning, apply to a
catchment management agency.
Proposal for establishment of catchment management agency
77. (1) A proposal to establish a catchment management agency must contain at
least—
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
a proposed name and a description of the proposed water management area of
the agency;
a description of the significant water resources in the proposed water
management area. and information about the existing protection, use,
development, conservation, management and control of those resources;
the proposed functions of the catchment management agency, including
functions to be assigned and delegated to it;
how the proposed catchment management agency will be funded;
the feasibility of the proposed catchment management agency in respect of
technical, financial and administrative matters; and
an indication whether there has been consultation in developing the proposal
and the results of the consultation.
(2) The Director-General may assist a person to develop such a proposal.
Procedure for establishment of catchment management agencies
78. ( I ) The Minister may, subject to section 6(1 )(c), on his or her own initiative or
after receiving a proposal conttiiriing  the information required in terms of section 77( 1 ).
by notice in the Gaze[te-
(a) establish a catchment management agency, give it a name and identify ond
determine its water management area; or
(b) amend the name or water management area of an established catchment
management agency.
(2) The Minister may—
(a)
(b)
require a person who has submitted a proposal contemplated in subsection ( 1 ),
to provide the Minister with information additional to that required by section
77(l); and
instruct the Director-General to conduct an investigation regarding—
(i) the establishment of a catchment management agency; or
(ii) a proposal submitted in terms of subsection (1).
(3) Before the establishment of a catchment management agency the Minister
must-
(a) publish a notice in the Gaze?te—
(i) setting out the proposed establishment of the catchment management
agency, the proposed name and the proposed water management area;
and
(ii ) inviting written comments to be submitted on the proposal specifying an
address to which and a date before which the comments are to be
submitted, which date may not be earlier than 60 days after publication of
the notice;
(b) consider what further steps, if any, are appropriate to bring the contents of the
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 45 ---

Ns
N(1 l~)lx2
(ioVllRNNIENT  GAZETIE. 26 A(JG(l S’r l~J9X
id No. 36, I’wtl
N.ATIONAI.  WA1’t.K .A(”T,  199X
no[icc  to IIW utmnlion of interested  persons. and [ake those steps  which [he
klini>(cr  c(msiclers  to bc appropriate; and
(t) c(m~idcr  iJll comlnents  received  on or bekme (be da[c specified in parugraph
([[)( ii).
(4) It tlw Minis[er wanls to amend the name O( a cxrtchmtmr management agency or 5
IIw wa(er man:igclncnt area <)f a catcbment nunagrmcnl  agency. the procedure set oat in
subsecti(m (3) tnus[ be followed with any necessary changes: Pro\ided thai where an
a]nendment  does not affect the rights of any person the procedure set out in subsection
(3) need no[ be IOI1OWCL
General powers and duties of catchment management agencies
lo
79. ( 1 ) A catchment management agency is a body corporate, and htis the powers of
a natural person of full capacity, except those powers which—
(a) by nature cm on] y attach to naturtil persons; or
(b) m-e inconsistent with this Act.
(2) Schedule 4 trpplies to a catchment management agency, its governing board and 15
commi![ces  and the members of’ the hoard and committees.
(3) A cutchinent management agency may perform-
(a) tiny 01 its lunclions; or
(h) any function which is reasonably incidental to tiny of its (unctions,
outside its water mtinagement area, if this does rrot—
Z()
(i) limit its capfici(y to perform its functions in its water management arwr; or
(ii) detrimentally atfect mother water management institution.
(4) [0 perhmning its functions a calchmerrt management agency must—
(a) be mindt’u] of lhe constitutional imperative [o redress the results of pas( racial
and gender discrimination and to achieve equitable access for all to the wuler 25
resources under its control;
(b) strive towards achieving co-operation  and consensus in managing the water
resources under its control; and
([) act prudently in financitit mtr[[ers.
Initial functions of catchment management agencies
30
80. Subject to Chapler 2 and section 79, upon the establishment of a catchment
management agency, (he initial functions of a ca(chment management agency we-
to investigate and advise interested persons (m the protection. USC, develop-
ment. conservation, management and control ot the water resources in its
waler management urea;
35
to develop a catchnrcnt management stmtegy;
10 co-ordinate the related activities of watel users and of the water
management  institutions within its water management area;
10 promote [he co-ordination ot’its implementation with the irl]pletnet]ti~ti~~i] ()[”
tiny applicable development plan establisheli in terms of the Water Scr\rces 40
Act, 1997 (Act No. 108 of 1997); and
to promote community  ptirticipation in the projection, use, devclopmcltl.
c(mw\a[ion.  n~anagcment and con[rol of’ (hc water resources in its water
management area,
Part 2: {hverning  board of cotchment management agencies
-)5
Part 2 describes the appointmetlt ojtnembers of the governing board qfa catchment
management agency. The board of a catchment manageme)tt  agency will be
constituted in such a way that interests of the various stakeholders are represented or
rejlected in a balanced  manner, and the necessary expertise  to operate effectively is
provided. Members t~f the governing board can be elected or nominated by the 50
diflerent water aser groups  for appointment t by the Minister, and the Minister may of
his or her own accorli appoint, filr-ther members. The Minister may also remove board
members for good reason.


--- PAGE 46 ---

w)
N(I. 1’)1%2
[;OV :RNNIJ:NT (; AZIYrTt:.  26 AIJ(;UST 1°98
Act No. 36.1998
N/\Tlo  N/11. WAIFR/\Cl.  199X
Appointment of governing board of catchment mm agement agency
81. ( 1 ) The members of a governing board of a catcl ment management agency must
he appointed by the Minister who. in making such ap Jointment.  must do so with the
object of achieving a balance among the interests of w iter users, potential water users.
local and provincial government and environmental in crest groups.
5
(~) Notwithstanding subse~ti~~ns (~) to (~) the Mi Iister nlust, from time to time,
determine the extent to which relevant local governme  Its should be represented on the
governing hoard of each catchrnent management agenty.
(3) Before appointing members to the go\erning  beard, the Minister must establish
tin wivisory committee contemplated in Chapter 9, to I :commend to the Minister—
10
(a) which organs of slate and bodies represenl ing different sectors and other
interests within the water management area of the catchment management
agency should be represented or reflected on the governing board; and
(b) the number of persons which each of them s lould be invited to nominate.
(4) The committee must consult with the relevant or ~ans of state and interest groups 15
before making its recommendations.
(5) After receiving the committee’s recommendat  ens, the Minister must decide
which organs of state and bodies will be invited t, J nominate representatives for
appointment to the governing board. and the numbt r of representatives each may
nominate.
2(I
(6) The Minister’s decision must be communicated o the organs of state and bodies
concerned and the Minister must take the necessary st :ps to obtain nominations from
them by a date specified by the Minister.
(7) The Minister must appoint the persons nominattd by the organs of state and the
bodies concerned in accordance with the invitation, un ‘ess—
25
([7) any such person is not a (it and proper person o serve on the governing board;
or
(h) any such organ of state or body has not follo ved its own internal procedures
in making the nomination.
(8) If the Minister does not appoint a nominee. the dinister must—
30
((J) inform the organ of state or body concerne i and state the reasons for not
appointing that nominee; and
(b) invite a further nomination from that organ c f state or body.
(9) If one or more nominations are still outstandi:lg on the date specified under
subsection (6), the Minister may appoint members of the board and till any vacancy 35
later.
( 10) After appointing members to the board the k inister may appoint additional
members selected by the Minister in order to—
(a) represent or reflect the interests identified by the advisory committee;
(b) achieve sufficient gender representation;
(c) achieve sufficient demographic representation] ;
(d) achieve representation of the Department;
(e) achieve representation of disadvantaged pers ms or communities which have
been prejudiced by past racial and gender discrimination in relation to access
to water; and
45
(~) obtain the expertise necessary for the efficient exercise of the board’s. powers
and performance of its duties.
( 1 I ) A member must be appointed for a specified (e] m of otlice.
( 12) The Minister may extend the term of office of; member,
( 13) If the term of office of a member expires before he first meeting of a new board 50
takes place. the existing member remains in oilice until that first meeting takes place.
( 14) A member nominated for appointment to the boi rd by an organ of state or body
is accountable to that organ of state or body.
40
Chairperson, deputy chairperson, chief executiw officer and committees of
catchment management agency
55
82. ( I ) The Minister must convene the first meetin < of the governing board of a


--- PAGE 47 ---

()?
No. 19182
GOVE RNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATEI ACT, 1998
5
ca(chmen( management agency, which must be chaired I )y an oflicial of the Department
or a member of the committee.
(2) At the first meeting of the governing board, them mlbers may recommend one of
them for appointment as chairperson and another :1s de] ~uty chairperson.
(3) The Minister must-
(a) with due regard to any recommendation mad: by the governing board at its
first meeting, appoint one of the members as ~hairperson; and
(b) appoint any other member as deputy chairperson.
(4) The chief executive officer provided for in Schei ‘ule 4 may be a member of the
governing board, but may not be its chairperson or dep ]ty chairperson.
10
(5) A catchment management agency may establ sh committees, including an
executive committee and consultative bodies, to perfor n any of its functions within a
particular area or generally or to advise it, and must dett rmine how they must function.
Removal of members from governing board
83. ( I ) The Minister may remove a member from a governing board, or remove the 15
chairperson or deputy chairperson from office, if—
(a) there is good reason for doing so;
(h) the person concerned has had an opportunity c f making representations to the
Minister; and
(c) the Minister has consulted with the governing board.
20
(2) The Minister must remove a member nominated b! an organ of state or body from
a governing board if that organ of state or body request i the Minister to do so.
(3) [f a person ceases for any reason to be a member c f a governing board before that
person’s term of otlice expires, the Minister may, for the remainder of the term of
office—
25
(OJ if that person was nominated by any organ of state or body, appoint another
person nominated by that organ or body; or
(IJ) if that person was selected by the Minister, a[ point another person.
Part 3: Operation of catchment managt ment agencies
Part 3 deals with the functions and operation of catc hment management agencies. 30
Initial functions, dealt with in Part 2, include the invest ‘gation  of and advice on water
resources, the co-ordination of the related activities of other water management
institutions within its water management area, the development of a catchment
management strategy and the promotion of community participation in water
resource management within its water management area. Additional powers and 35
duties described in Schedule 3 may be assigned or de~ egated to agencies such as to
establish water use rules and management systems, to direct users to terminate illegal
uses of wate~ and to temporarily limit the use of wate) dun”ng  pen”ods  of shortage.
A catchment management agency may be jinancefi by the state from water use
charges made in its water management area or from a vy other source.
40
Funding of catchment management agencies
84. (l) A catchment management agency may raise a Iy funds required by it for the
purpose of exercising any of its powers and carrying out 
~ my of its duties in terms of this
Act.
(2) A catchment management agency must be funded by—
(a) money appropriated by Parliament;
(b) water use charges; and
(c) money obtained from any other lawful source f x the purpose of exercising its
powers and carrying out its duties in terms of his Act.
Documents relating to litigation
45
50
85. A catchment management agency must provide thl Director-General with copies


--- PAGE 48 ---

94
N(). 191X2
GOVE ?N!vIENT  GAZETTE, 26 ALrGUST 1998
Act NO. 36, ]!)~8
NATIONAL WATEF ACT. 1998
of all pleadings, affidavits and other documents in th(: possession of the catchment
management agency relating to any proceedings ins ituted against that catchment
management agency.
Delegation of powers by catchment management agt ncy
86. ( I ) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), a catchn[ent  management agency may
delegate my power to—
(a)
(b)
(c)
((1)
a member of its governing board;
an employee of any water management institution (including itself), by name,
or to the holder of an office in that institution: or
any committee established by the cotchmer t management agency which
consists only of members of the governin{ board or employees of the
catchment mamrgetnent agency: and
any other person or body only with the writtc I consent of the Minister.
(2) A catchment management agency may not deleg; te—
([/) the power of delegation: or
(b) any power to make water use Charges.
(3) A catchment management agency may only dele.g [te a power to authorise the use
of water. it this power is delegated to a committee consi: ting of three or more members
01 its governing board.
Pat-t 4: Intervention, disestablishment or change of water management areas of
catchtnent management aget ties
Part 4 enables the Minister to disestablish a catch went management agency or
make changes to its water management area, for reas~ ms which include the need to
reorganise water management institutions for more effi ‘ctive water resource manage-
ment. An agency may al.~o be disestablished if it does ) :ot operate effectively.
Intervention by Minister
87. ( 1 ) If a catchment management agency—
(u) is in financial difficulties or is being otherwist mismanaged;
(b) has acted unfairly or in a discriminatory or inequitable way towards any
person within its water management area;
(c) has failed to comply with any directive given >y the Minister under this Act;
(d) has obstructed the Minister or any other wa er management institution in
exercising a power or performing a duty in tel ms of this Act;
(e) is unable to exercise its powers or perform its duties effectively due to
dissension among the members of the board (r water users within its water
management area;
(f) has failed to comply with this Act; or
(g) has become redundant or ineffective.
the Minister may—
(i) direct the catchment management agency to t: ke any action specified by the
Minister: tind
(ii) withhold any financial assistance which migh otherwise be available to the
catchment management agency. until tlw catch men[ management agency has
complied with SUCI1 directive.
(2) A directive contemplated in subsection ( 1 )(i) mus! state—
(cl) the nature of the deficiency;
(b) the steps which must be taken to remedy the s tuation; and
(() a reasonable period within which those steps I lust be taken.
(3) If the catchment management agency fails to re nedy the situation within the
given period, the Minister nuiy-
(a) after having given that catchment management agency a reasonable opportu-
nity to be heard; and
5
lo
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 49 ---

96
N(), 1°18?
GOVI RNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. M, lYXl 
NATIONAL WATE { ACT, 191)8
(h) after having afforded the catchrnent manage lment agency a hearing on any
submissions received,
tuke over the relevant power or duty 01 the catchment I management agency.
(4) [f the Minister takes over a power or duty of a cd chment mtinagernent agency—
(a) the Minister may do anything which the catchlnent management agency might 5
otherwise be empowered or required to dc by or under this Act, to the
exclusion of the catchment management agelcy;
(b) the board of the catchment management agent y may not, while the Minister is
responsible for that power or duty, exercise a ly of its powers or perform any
of its duties relating to that power or duty;
I ()
(c) an employee or a contractor of the catcbn ent management agency must
comply with a directive given by the Ministe-;
(d) as soon as the Minister is satisfied that the cachment  management agency is
once more able to exercise its powers or pe ‘form its duties effectively, tbe
Minister must cease exercising any such po .vers and performing any such 15
duties; and
(c) the Minister may recover from the catch nent management agency all
reasonable costs incurred, including any loss’s suf~ered as a result of iawfu]
and reasonable action taken under this sectic n, except to the extent that the
loss is caused or contributed to by the negligence of the Minister, or any 20
person under the control of the Minister.
Disestablishment of catchment management agency
88. ( 1 ) The Minister may, by notice in the Gtic ‘fte, disestablish a catchrnent
management agency if it is desirable—
(a) for purposes 0[ re-organisin,g  water managem( nt institutions in that area in (he 25
interests of effective water resource managen ent;
(b) because the catchment management agerw: cannot or does not operate
effectively; or
(c) because there is no longer a need for the catc lment management agency.
(2) Before disestablishing a catchmeot management agency the Minister must—
30
([7) publish a notice in tbe G(~;c(It’-
(i) stating the intention to disestablish the ( atchment management agency
aJld the reasons therefor; and
(ii) inviting written comments on the propo$ :d disestablishment and gi\ing
a specified address to which and a date bc fore which the comments are to 35
he submitted. which date may not he earlier than 60 days after
publication of the notice:
(b) consider what further steps, if any, are appropt iate to bring the contents of the
notice to the attention of interested persons, md take those steps which the
Minister considers to be appropriate; and
(c) consider all comments received on or before he specified date.
40
Transfer of assets and liabilities after change of water management area or
disestablishment
89. ( I ) It’ the Minister changes the water management area of a ctitchnlent
management agency under section 78 or disestablishes u xrtchrnent management agency 45
under section 88, the Minister may direct the catchment management agency to transfer
some or all of its assets and liabilities to another water management institution.
(2) A catchment management agency must do everything in its power to give effect
to a directive under subsection ( 1 ).
(3) In issuing a directive under subsection ( 1 ) the M nister must consider-
50
((/) the interests of creditors and users of water; a MI
(b) any financial contributions directly or indirec Iy made by the users of water
resources towards the infrastructure of the cat :hment management agency.
(4) Where a catchment rnantigement agency is dis established and its assets and
liabilities [Ire not transferred to another water manage nent institution its assets and 55


--- PAGE 50 ---

98
N() 191X2
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. M, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
liubiiities  vest in the Minister and the Minister must wind up its affairs and assume the
powers and du[ics of [he catchment management agency for the period of winding up.
(5) No transt’er duty, other tax or duty is payable in respect of the transfer of any
assets in terms ot’ this section.
Regulations on catchment management agencies
90. ( 1 ) Subject to subsection (2), the Minister may make regulations—
(u) prescribing a maximum and a minimum number of members of a governing
board;
(b) requiring the establishment of consultative forums and determining their
composition and functions;
(c) determining, in consultation with the Minister of Finance, the basis and extent
(2
of remuneration and payment of expenses of members of governing boards
and committees; and
d) on wry other matter which is necessary or desirable for the efficient
functioning of’ catchment management agencies and their governing boards
and committees.
In making regulations, the Minister must take into account all relevant
considerations, i~clud~ng the need t~
(a) achieve adequate representation of and consultation with organs of state,
bodies representing different sectors and other interests within the areas of
jurisdiction of catchment management agencies; and
(b) secure the efficient find cost effective functioning of catchment management
agencies and their management structures.
CHAPTER 8
WATER USER ASSOCIATIONS
This Chapter deals with the establishment, powers and disestablishment of water
user associations. Although water user associations are water management institu-
tions their primary purpose, unlike catchment management agencies, is not water
management. They operate at a restricted localised level, and are in effect
co-operative associations of individual water users who wish to undertake water-
related activities for their mutual benefit. A water user association may exercise
management powers and duties only if and to the extent these have been assigned or
delegated to it. The Minister establishes and disestablishes water user associations
according to procedures set out in the Chapter. A water user association for a
particular purpose would usually be established following a proposal to the Minister
by an interested person, but such an association may also be established on the
Minister’s initiative. The functions of a water user association depend on its approved
constitution, which can be expected to conform to a large extent to the model
constitution in Schedule 5. This Schedule also makes detailed provisions fbr the
management and operation of water user associations. Although water user
associations must operate within the framework of national policy and standards,
particularly the national water resource strategy, the Minister may exercise control
over them by giving them directives or by temporarily taking over their functions
under particular circutnstances.
Existing irrigation boards, subterranean water control boards and water boards
established for stock watering purposes will continue in operation until they are
restructured as water user associations.
Proposal for establishment of water user association
91. ( 1 ) A proposal to estublish a water user association must contain at least—
([/) the reasons for making the proposal;
(/)) a proposed name and area of operation for the association;
(c) the proposed activities of the association;
(d) a description of any existing or proposed waterwork within the proposed area
of operation which is relevant to the proposed activities of the association;
5
10
[5
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 51 ---

I(nl
N(). 1°18?
(; OVERN  MENT GAZE’IIE, 26 ALJ(; UST 1998
,~ct N{). M, 199%
NATIONAL WATER ACT’, 19’)8
((’)
(1)
(s)
(/1)
a description 01’ (he wii(er use Iicences or any o[her iiir[horiwtions which the
proposed members hold or intend applying for;
the proposed” constitution of the association.  t(~gcther with an explanation for
any pr(wis ions which differ trom those of the model constitution cont:iiiwd in
%hedule 5;
it list of the propt)wd nwmbcrs (jr c~ttegories of rnemhers of the ~issoci:lti{m;
and
tin indication whether’ there hits been consul[iition in developing the propos;d
5
;inil the results of the consirlta (ion.
(2) The Director-Gencr:il ln:ty assist a person to develop such ii proposrl.
10
Procedure for estuhlishmeut  of water user association
92. ( 1 ) The Miilister miiy on his or her own ini(ia[ive or irfier receiving :i propowil
cont~tining [he inl’ormution  required in terms ot section 9 I ( I ), by notice in the Gacet{e-
((/) estiiblish a water user dissociation, give it a niunc, determine its areti of
operation and iipprx)ve its constitution subject to section 93(2); or
15
(b) a m e n d  Ihe ntime, weir of oper-:ition or approve ;tn iimemlment to tht
constitution of an cs(ablished  water user association.
(2) The Minister nuiy-
(a) require ii person who h:ls submitted ii proposal in terms of subsection ( I ) to
provide the Minister with iiilditional infbrmiition to thut required by section 20
91(l); and
(b) instruct the Director-Geneml  to conduct an investigation regarding—
(i) the establishment of a wirtcr user associu(ion; or
(ii) ~i prop~)s:il submitted in terms of subscctioil ( 1).
(3) Before the establishment of ii wtiter user association the Minister nJilsI-
~5
((l)
(1))
([”)
pliblish :i notice in the Gctzc([e-
(i) setting out the proposed establishment of the w:iter user w+ociirtion,  the
proptlsed name :incl the proposed area of oper~ition; :ind
(ii) inviting written comments to be slibtnitted on the propmir]s,  specifying
an :iddress to which :ind :i date before which the comments :ire to be 30
submitted, which date may not be e;irlier than 60 ckiys :itier pub[ictition  of
the rmtice;
consider whirt further steps, if any, are :ippropriiite  to bring the cnntents of the
notice to the titten[ion of interested persons, and tiik~ (hose steps which the
Minister cnnsiders to be irppropriiite;  and
35
consider any comments received on or before the diite specilieil in pariigri]ph
(t/J( 
ii).
(4) The Minister nctxi not fiiltil :ill the requirements of subsecti(m (3), if there hits
beeil sutficienl consultation on ii pr(~pos;tl  submitted in terms ol section 91.
(5) The Minister nMy-
40
([/) recover the cost of complying with subsection (3) from the woter user
association once it has been established; or
(b) require the person proposing the establishment ofthc  wtiter mwr iissociittion to
pay the costs in :idvance.
Constitution of water user association
45
93. ( I ) Schcdulc 5 conttiins ii model constitutiotl which m:iy be used its :i biisis for
drttwing  up and propming o constitution fur :i proposed wiiter user ilSSOciiitiO1l.
(?) The constitution of :i w;iter Liser Jssocititi(m I1lLIS(  contiiin  at !c:ist—
((l)
(b)
(()
((/)
((’)
ff)
(s)
(/1)
dct~iils i)t [he pt-incip;il  ~ind ancill:try  fi]nc[ions  of the iissocitition;
the procedures Liid requirements for ildinittirlg
new members [0 tlw 50
iissocii ilion; ”
the voting po\vers of members;
prtxxxtures  t’or [crmin:iting membership;
procedures [[w electing the mirnagement committee 01’ the association;
pi-(wdur:ll rcquircnwnts  for :ippointnwnt of employees of the associ;]iion:
55
procedilr:il  requirenmnts for obtaining lo~tns; :ind
the Iiniinci:il oblig:ttions of membm  towards the associ:i[ion.


--- PAGE 52 ---

102
No. 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
(3) A constitution Imust also incorporate such other provisions as the Minister may
reason~bly  require and must be adopted by the members of tbe association and approved
by the Minister before it can exercise any powers or perform any duties.
(4) A constitution adopted by a water user association is binding on all its members.
Powers of water user association
94. ( I ) A water user association is a body corporate and has the powers of a natural
person of full capacity, except those powers which—
(a) by nature can only attach to natural persons; or
(b) are inconsistent with this Act.
(2) Schedule 4 (excluding item 4(3) of Part 1 of that Schedule) applies to a water user
association as if—
(a) the water user association were an institution; and
(b) a member of the management committee were a director,
within the meaning of that Schedule, except to the extent that the Minister may
otherwise direct.
Directives to water user association
95. ( I ) The Minister may, after consulting with a water user association, direct that a
person be admitted as a member of the association on such conditions as are fair and
equitable.
(2) A water user association must comply with a directive given under subsection(1).
(3) If a wuter user association—
(u) is in financial ditliculties or is being otherwise mismanaged;
(b) has acted unfairly or in a discriminatory or inequitable way towards any
member of the association;
(c) has failed to admit persons to membership unfairly or on discriminatory
grounds;
(d) has failed to comply with any directive given by the Minister under this Act;
(e) has obstructed the Minister or any other water management institution in
exercising a power or performing a duty in terms of this Act;
(~) is unable to exercise its powers or perform its duties effectively due to
dissension among the management committee or its members;
(g) has failed to comply with its constitution or this Act; or
(h) has become redundant or ineffective,
the Minister may—
(i) direct tbe association to take any action specified by the Minister;
(ii) withhold any financial assistance which might otherwise be available to the
water user association until the association has complied with such directive;
or
(iii) by notice addressed to the association and the member concerned, terminate
the office of that member of the management committee and arrange for the
resulting vacancy on the management committee to be filled.
(4) A directive contemplated in subsection (3)(i) must state—
(u) the nature of the deficiency;
(b) the steps wbicb must be taken to remedy the situation; and
(c) a reasonable period within which those steps must be taken.
(5) If the water user association fails to remedy the situation within the given period,
the Minister may-
(a) after having given that association a reasonable opportunity to be heard; and
(b) after having afforded the association a hearing on any submissions received,
take over the relevant function of the association, or appoint a suitable person to take
over the power or duty.
(6) If the Minister, or a person appointed by the Minister, takes over a power or duty
of a water user association—
(u) the Minister or the appointee may do anything which the association might
otherwise be empowered or required to do in terms of its constitution or by or
under this Act, to the exclusion of the association;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 53 ---

104
N,I. 1°IX?
(; OVIXNMEN’I’ GAZLWTE, 26 A(IGLIST  1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAI. WATER  ACT, 1998
(b)
((”)
(1/)
(,’)
[he mMI;Igemem  committee of tbc association may not, while the Minister (M
(Iw appointee  is responsible for lbal power or duty, exercise any of its powers
or pet-ftmn any ot’ i[s duties relating to thtit power or duty;
an elnploycc  or u contractor of the association  must comply with a directi\ e
given by Ilw Minister or (he :Ippointee;
5
M soon  m (be Minister  is satisfied [hat the tissocia(ion  is once more  ublc (()
exercise  its powers find pert’orm its duties effectively, the Minister or the
appointee, as the cusc mtiy be, musI cease exercising such powers and
pcrl’orrning such duties: and
[he Minister may recover from the association all reasonable costs incurred by I ()
the Ministm or the appointee, including-
(i) the reasonable fees or disbursements of the appointee; and
(ii) any losses suffered as a result of Itiwful and reasonable action taken
under this section, except to the extent that the loss is caused or
contributed to by the negligence of the Minister or the appointee or my 15
person under their control.
Disestablishment of water user association
96. ( I ) The Minister may, by notice in the Ga:et/e, disestablish an association-
((/)
(t])
(1”)
((1)
(f’)
(.IJ
in circumstances provided for in the constitution of the association;
if the functions of the ussocia(ion are, by agreement with another water 20
management institution, to be combined with, or taken over by that water
management institution;
it’ ii is in [he bes[ interes[s of [he associir[ion  or its members;
if on investigtition of its affairs or financitil position reveals thut
disestablishment is tippropriate;
15
if the Minister has taken over a power or duty of’ the association as a result ol
dissensions among (he management committee or its members; or
if the association is no longer active or el~ective.
(2) Before disestablishing a water user associulion [he Minister must-
(u) pubiisb a notice il~ Ihe @xtfc’-
30
(1))
(c)
“(i) stating the intention to disestablish the water user association:
(ii) setting out the reasons for disestablishing the water user associati(m; und
(iii ) inviting writ[en comments on the propostil,  specifying tin address t{)
which and a date before which the comments tire to be submitted, which
d~te may not be curlier than 60 days after publication 01’ the notice;
consider what further steps, if any, m appropriate to bring the contenls of the
notice to [he attention of interested persons, and take those steps which the
Minister considers to be oppropriote; anLI
consider all comments received on or before the specified date.
35
Winding up affairs of disestablished water user association
-10
97. ( 1 ) When a water user association is disestablished. its idfairs must be wound lIp—
(</) as provided Ibr in ils constitution; or
(b) by a person appointed by the Minister in accordtincc with directives given by
the Minisler it lhe constitution does not provide Ior winding up.
( 2 ) The costs of winding up d water user association are a cost uguinst the eslate ot’the 45
Msocial ion.
(3) Creditor’s of a water user association must be paid occording to the order ot’
preltrence  established by the Insolvency Act, 1936 (Act No. 24 of 1936).
(4) If the atiairs ola waler user association are wound up, the Minister may direct thtit
an amount equivalent to any linancial contributions with interest made to the associtition 50


--- PAGE 54 ---

I 06
N() 101X2
(;OV ;RNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AU(; UST 1998
Act No. M, 1998
NATIONA[.  WATF R ACT, 1998
from public funds be reimbursed, before assets are dif tributed among the members of
the association.
(5) No transfer duty, other tax or duty is payable n respect of the transfer of any
assets under subsection (4).
Transitional provisions for certain existing organis+ Itions
98. ( I ) This section applies te--
(a) any irrigation board or subtermnean  water control board established by or
deemed to be an irrigation bowxl in terms {f any law in force immedititely
before the commencement of this Act;
(b) the Kalahari West Water Board, established b y Government Notice No, 143 of
13 August 1982;
(c) the Karos-Geelkoppan Water Board, establi: hed by Government Notice No
145 of 7 October 1983; and
(d) the Kalahari East Water Board, established Iy Government Notice No. 2233
of 4 November 1988,
each of which is a board for the purposes of this secti m.
(2) A board continues to exist until it is declared IO be a water user association in
terms of subsection (6) or until it is disestablished in te ON of the law by or under which
it was established, which law must, for the purpo:e of such disestablishment, be
regarded as not having been repealed by this Act.
(3) Subiect to subsection (4)—
(a)
(b)
(c’)
(d)
the name, area of operation, manageme lt, property, rights, liabilities,
obligations, powers and duties of a board I amain the same as immediately
before the commencement of this Act;
this section does not atiect the continuity, sta us, operation or etiect of any act
or omission of a board, or of any by-lav made by a board, before the
commencement of this Act;
any person holding ofhce with a board when his Act commences continues in
office for the term of that person’s appointrr ent; and
if a position becomes vacant prior to the de ;laration of the board as a water
user
- association, the board m~y fill the vat: ncy according to the procedures
laid down by or under the law which applied to that board immediately before
the commencement of this Act.
(4) Within six months of the commencement of th s Act, a board must prepare and
submit to the Minister a proposal, prepared accordin; : to section 91, to transform the
board into a water user association.
(5) The Minister may accept the proposal contem )lated in subsection (4), with or
without amendments, or reject it.
(6) If the Minister accepts the proposal, the Ministe ~ must by notice in the Ga:e[te-
((~) declare the board to be a water user associa ion;
(b) give it a name;
(c,) determine its area of operation; and
(d) approve its constitution.
(7) Upon the publication of a notice under subsect on (6), every property, right and
liability of the board becomes a property, right and Iitbility of the relevant water user
association.
CHAPTER 9
ADVISORY COMMITI EES
This Chapter empowers the Minister to establi vh advisory committees. Each
advisory committee will be established for a particular purpose, and it is therefore
possible for a variety of advisory committees to be e.w zblished with different purposes
and functions. Although primarily advisory in natur{, such committees may exercise
powers which are delegated to them. The Minister , nay amend the functions of an
advisory committee, or disestablish it. Certain exl ~ting advisory committees will
continue to functi”on  as though they were advisory C( remittees established under this
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 55 ---

lox
N{) 19182
GOV ;RNMEN’J G/\ ZETTE. 26 A(IGIIST 199X
—
Act No. .36. 1998
N,ITIONAI.  WAT1 R A(’T, 199X
Kstahlishment of advisory committees
99. ( I ) The Minis(er  ITIay -
([1) establish  a n  advisory  commiltce:
(h) give  it a name or change  its name:
(~) dc[crmine its purpose anti functions or el~ec{ amendments thereto;
(d) Inahc  appointments [() Ihc con)mittcc. inclu( in: the chairperson  and
chair perstm:
(c) remove persons from Ihc committee: anti
(/”) disestablish an advisory committee.
(2) ollicials  of the Department mav be members 01 an advisory committee.
(3) A member of a cot~mlittce tnay-be remunemteci N directed hy the Minister. with
the concurrence of the Minister of’ Flni[nce.
(4) An act performed in good t~ith by a committe! is valid, despite any failure to
comply with il formal procedural requirement.
(5) The I>epartmen(  may supply administmtive sup mrt services to a committee.
(6) An oliicial of the IXpartment who is not a nember  of the commi(tce,  it so
directed by (he l>ircctor-Gellcr:ii. may attend a meeting )fa committee, but may not vote
at the meeting.
(7) The Minister in appointing a member of il comlnittce. must consider-
(a) the powers and (Iuties of the c(~nlnlittce:
(h) the need for the cxm~mittee to represent vari{ ms relevant interests: and
(<) the expertise ncccw:wy for [he cxmlmiltee 10 exercise its powers and perform
its duties et?eclively.
Regulations regarding advisory committees
100. The Minister may by regulation establish terms ot’ relerence and i~lly other rules
concernitlg  the membership, powers and duties and or eratimr of a committee.
Transitional provisions relating to advisory commil tees
101. ( 1 ) The National Water Advisory Council established by section 3A of the Water
Act, 1956 (Act No. 54 ot 1956), the Advisory Committ( e on Safety of’ Dams established
by secti(m 9C(5 )(~~)(i) of the Water Act, 1956. and any advisory committee estahlishcd
under section 68( [ ) of the W.tter Act. 1956. mwst bc regarded as being an advisory
committee contemplated in this Act.
(2) Subject to (he Minister’s powers under section ! 9—
(a) Ibe name. powers and duties of a committee )r body referred to in subsection
( I ) remain the same i]s they were immedia[t Iy before the commencement of
this Act;
(b) any provision of the Water Act. 1956. or a r :gulation or notice issued under
tbiit Act regulating any matter contemplated m section 99, continues to apply
as it it were a regulati(m tnadc under sectim 1 ()(); and
(() any person holding ot}ice in a committee or t ody referred (o in subsection ( I )
immediately before the conm~encenwnt of th s Act continues in office until the
expiration of that person’s term ofappointmelt  or until the committee or body
is disestablished, whichever happens sooner
CHAPTER 10
INTERNATIONAL WATER MAI JAGENIENT
Under this Chapter the Minister may establish bo lies to implement international
agreements in respect of the management and develoi ment of water resources shared
with neigh boun”ng  countries, and on regional co-opelation over water resources. The
governance, powers and duties of these bodies are determined by the Minister in
accordance with the relevant international agreeme  vt, but they may also be given
additional functions, and they may perform their Junctions outside the Republic.
5
10
15
Z()
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 56 ---

110
No 191 W
GOVI :RNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36.1998
NATIONAL WATE < ACT, 1998
Certain existing international bodies are deemed to b e bodies established under this
Act.
Establishment of bodies to implement international agreements
102. The Minister may, in consultation with the Cabinet, by notice in the Gc7zefte,
establish a body to implement any international agreement entered into by the South 5
African Government and a foreign government relatin,: to—
(a) investigating, managing, monitoring and pro ecting water resources;
(b) regional co-operation cm water resources:
(c) acquiring, constructing, altering, operating o” maintaining a waterwork; or
(d) the allocation, use and supply of water.
I ()
Governance and functions of bodies
103. ( I ) A notice contemplated in section 102 must, with due regard to the relevant
international agreement, give details of—
(a) the governance of the body;
(tJ) the functions of the body;
15
(c) the financing of the body;
(d) mechanisms for controlling and supervising he affairs of the body;
(e) which items of Schedule 4, if any, apply to t le body;
(f) the disestablishment of the body and the win{ ing-up of the body’s affairs; and
(,?) any other matter necessary to give effect to ~ le agreement.
20
(2) [f the Minister is satisfied that it will not prejt{dice the capacity of a body to
perform the functions for which it was established, !he Minister may direct a body
established under section 102 to perform additional functions which may include, but
are not limited to, providing water management institr. [ions with—
(o) management services;
25
(b) tinancial services:
(c) trzaining; a n d
(d) other support services.
(3) The body may perform its functions outside the Republic.
Powers of bodies
30
104. A body established under section 102 is a body corporate and has the powers of
a natural person of full capacity, except those powers vhich—
(c7) by their nature can attach only to natural peI$ons;  or
(h) are excluded by or are inconsistent with this Actor the relevant international
agreement.
35
Bodies must manage different functions as separat~ units
105. (1) If given additional functions under section 113(2), a body must manage each
of its functions separately, and must account for them separately.
(2) A body must apply accounting practices con ,istent with generally accepted
accounting practices.
40
Reports on performance of functions
106. ( I ) Unless the international agreement provides >tberwise, a body must report on
the performance of its functions within three months after the end of its financial year.
(2) The report must-
(a) be accompanied by the body’s audited finan :ial statements for that financial 45
year: and


--- PAGE 57 ---

112
N<, IL)IX2
(;OVt RN MEN’1’ (;/\ Zt-”lT’[;. 26 A(JGUS’r 1998
Act No. 36, 199(I
N/YlloN,ll.W  Klt;\A  (’T, 1998
(b) hcsL1bll~itted t(Jtlle Minister:ind  such f}therl ~:lrty:is tnaybercquired  by the
inlcrn:uion:d agrecmen(.
(3) ThcreI>(~r[ l~~tls( ct~ntain sLlllicicllt inl"(~rl~ltlti{~  llt(j[lll(lw the Minister lt)~isscss(lle
pcrkwnl:uwe of’the body in respecl of all its functions ag tinst the objectives set out in the
relevant agrecnwn[.
5
(4) The Director-General mus( send a copy of’ Ihe report to the Secrc(ary to
Parliament.
Investi@ion  of affairs or financial position of bodiis
107. ( I ) The Minister may. with the comsetlt of the o her parties 10 the agreement. ~~r
il the agreemen(  so provides. appoint a person (() inlcstigotc the aflilirs or fitltiil~ii{l
1 ()
pt)siti~~n 01 ;I body and tha( person  may (i~r this purpose  attend any meeting of” the body.
(~) A boLly  ,l)(ls(, s~lblccl to sub~e~[i~)n (1), on Iegucst, pr[)vidc t h e  M i n i s t e r ’ s
uppointce  wi(b such —-
(~1~ i[lii)l-lll:lli( )tlt)rl tlle:ltl`i]irs:itlc!  fillilllci:ll p()sil(lfl  ()tllleb()tly:
(h) :icccss  [()ullb()()ks,  :lcc(ltlr)(s,  d()cl[[]]el]ts:lll(  :lssets  oltllebody::\ild”
(t) inf’ormali(m  nnddiit:~on  w;derrcsourccs.
as may Iw required by the Minislcr{)r  the Minister’s a~pointcc.
(3) The Minister m;ty rccx)vcr f’r~ml the b[dy c(mwmcd (he rc:lsonilhlc fees and
disburscnwnts (lfony pmwm ~qlpoinlcd uldcrsulmcli{m  (1).
Is
Transitional provisions relating to existing lmdies
20
CHAPTER 11
(; OVERNMEN’l> WA’IERW  ORKS
This Chaptergives  the Minister the power to estthlish  attdoperatego~~erllltlejtt
waterworks in thepublic  iatere.st out (~ffrtltds  allocat ’dby Parliament or-from other 30
,sources. Examples of such waterworks include wattr  storage dams, water transfer
schemes a)~d,fl{~od tittejtltati~~lt works. The Minister nust satisfy certain procedural
requirements hefhre constructing a government n’ater vork, including a duty to obtain
an environmental impact assessment and invite public comment, except for
emergency, temporary or insignljieant waterwork.  Water from a government 35
waterw'{~rk )naybetllade  available fc}rallt)cati(~~~ t<~ w~terusers andchargesjxedfor
this water. Witer in a government waterwork mao also be made available jor
recreation alpurposes,  subject to control sdetermined  5ythe Minister andregulations
made by the Minister. Existijlgg(~v’erJtttlettt  n’aterwo iksaresubj”ect to this Chapter.
Acquisition, construction, alteration, repair, operat on and control of government 40
waterworks
109. The Minister may acquire. construct, tiller, rep:li r, operate or control government
waterworks in order to protect, use, develop, conserve, manage and control the na[ion’s
w:i(cr resources in the public interest.
Consultation and environmental impact assessment
45
110. ( I ) Beft]re constructing u watcrwork.  the Mini:ter nlust-
(~~) prcpul-e tin envir[mmenl:d impact :lssessu lent rclati ng 10 the proposect
w;~tcrwork which must, where the Minister 1 wnsiders it iippropriote, comply
with the requirements contained in regulalio w made under’ section 26 of the
I;nvir(mnwnt C(mscr\:]tion  Act. 1‘)X9 ( Act N O. 73 of 1989):
50


--- PAGE 58 ---

114
N(I [(){8?
(; OVMINMEN’r  GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 1998
.Ac’t N{). .36, 1998
NATK)NAIJ wATEK ACT ] 998
(/)) publish a no[ice in the (;[I:e/rfL
( i ) w[(ing (mt k propt)sal i{} construct (he wa(erwork;
(ii ) containing a summary of’ the environmental impuct assessment; and
( iii) inviting writ(en comments to be submitted, specifying an address to
which and a date before which the comments are (o be submitted, which 5
d~l[~ may not be earlier than 60 dtiys afier publication of the notice;
(1) consider what t’urlhcr steps, if’ any. are uppropriotc to bring the contents of’ the
notice to the attention of interested txrsrms, and take [hose s[eps which [be
k! inistcr c(msiclers to be appropriate;  and
(d) c(msidcr--
( i ) all cotmnwnts received on or before
paragraph(b) (iii); and
(ii) the environmeottil impact assessment.
(?) Subsecti[m ( I ) does 001 apply—
(a) to a wa[erwork which is constructed in emergency
1 ()
the date specified in
circumstances;
I15
(h) to a Iemp(mwy watcrw~)rk  in operation for a period of’ less than five years; or’
(() if’ the wtiterwork is a minor one.
(3) Within two years aticr the completion of any waterwork  contemplated in
sufwcction  (?)(~(), the Minister must decide either—
(to (o demolish the wuterwork; or
Z()
(b) at’ter complying with subsection ( I ) to the appropriate extent. to retain the
watcrwork.
Financing of government waterworks
111. The Minister may finance the acquisition, construction, alteration, repair.
opertition and control of’ government waterworks from funds uppropriatecf by Parliament 25
or obtained from any other source.
Water from government waterworks
112. ( 1 ) The Mini~ter may muke wirter from a government waterwork  available for’
all{~cation in acc~mlancc with Chapter 4.
(’?) The Minister InLIy [[l acc~]rcfance with Chapter 5 Iix a charge for Witer :lllO~alcd 30
l’rom a governmen[ waterwork.
Access to and use of government waterworks for recreational purposes
113. ( I ) The water of’ a go\’crnnwnt wotcrwork and the surrxmnding  st~te-ownecf land
may be made available for recreational purposes. either generally or for a specific
purpose, on tlw conditions and to the persons Lfeter’mi ned by the Minister.
35
(2) The Minister n]ay-
(t~) cuntrx)l or prohibit ticcess to any government watcrwork;  and
(b) subject to this Act, nmkc rcasontibie charges tor-
(i) tlw use of’;
(ii) entry into; and
(iii) the LISC of’ any wuter surface or land associated with,
tiny government wuterwork for recreational purposes.
(3) Nothing dtme under this section exempts any person trom complying wi[h other
pi-ovisitms (~t’ this Act and with any other applic~hte law.
(;owmnwnt watcrwnrks  constructed before commencement of Act
I l-t. This Act also applies to government
waterworks Cotlsttuc[ed  before lhe
c(~tl]l]~etlccll]ellt 01 this Acl.
Disposal of government waterworks
115. ( I ) The Minister  mtiy trwlsler.  sell o r  o t h e r w i s e  disp~~se of’ any governm~n!
walcrworlo  to any perstm.
40
50


--- PAGE 59 ---

(10
N,] 1{)182
(GOVERNMENT GAZE’ITE, ?6 A(JGIJST  19°X
Ad No. 36, 1998
NM’IONA1,  WATER  A(’T, 199X
(~) pJ() ~ovcrl,ln~nl  w~~telwork ref’erre~ [() in subsection ( i ) may be transferred, sold
or disposed 01 with(mt [he Jpproval of’ the nationid execu{ive, it its vtilue exceeds an
amount specified from time to titne by the Minister in concurrence with the Minislcr of
F’intince,
(3) Where it g o v e r n m e n t  waterwork  is disposed of or Wmsferrecl k) a waler
mimtigemcnt  institution, (he Minister of’ Finance may direct tba[ no transfer duty, {>[hcr
tax or duty is payable.
Regulations regarding government waterworks
116. ( 1 ) The Minister may, with regard to a government wtiterwork, make regula[i(ms
providing for-
(a) the management of iin(f control over governnwn[  wiit~rworks  tind surrounding
stale-owned [and;
(})) the List of” the water  of’ a government waterwork  and the surrounding
state-owned land; and
(c) chiuges for—
(i) entrance to:
(ii) use of f’acifities at; ilfld
(iii) the privtite development of,
a government waterwork.
(~) ]11 making the regulations, the Minister must take into account all relevant
considerations, including—
(a) the safety and protection of government waterworks;
(b) the need for control of” the use of government waterworks;
(c) the safety and security of’ persons using government waterworks for
recrefitional purposes; and
(d) the cost of protecting and controlling government waterworks and the
recovery of these costs.
CHAPTER 12
SAFETY OF DAMS
This Chapter contains measures aimed at improving the safety of new and existing
datns with a safety risk so as to reduce the potential for harm to the public, damage to
property or to resource quality. 10 reduce the risk of a dam failure, control measures
require an owner to comply with certain directives and regulations, such as to submit
a report on the safety of a dam, to repair or alter a dam, or to appoint an approved
professional persou to undertake these tasks. These measures are in addition to the
owners’ comtnon law responsibility to ensure the s~fety of their dams. An approved
professional person has a statutory duty of care towards the State and the general
public and must fuljil, amongst other things, dejined responsibilities when acting
under this Chapter. Not all datns are subject to regulation under this Chapter, and the
Minister may exempt certain persons from its requirements. Only dams of a dejiued
size, dams which have been declared to be dams with a safety risk, or dams falling into
a prescribed category are affected. All dams with a safety risk must be registered.
Compliance with any directive or regulation under this Chapter does not exempt an
owner from complying with any other provision of this Act, such as the requirement
for a licence or other authorisation for water use in respect of the dam.
Definitions
117. In this Chapter—
(u)
“approved professional person” tneans a person registered in terms of the
Engineering Profession of South Africa Act, 1990 (Act No. 114 of 1990). and
approved by the Minister after consultation with the Engineering Council of
South Africa (established by section 2 of that Act);
(/))
“dam” includes any existing or proposed structure which is capable of
containing,  storing or impounding wdtcr (including temporary impoundment
or s(ol-age ), wfwther that water contains any substance or not;
5
I ()
15
30
35
-lo
45
50


--- PAGE 60 ---

11s
N,) l~)l~?
(; OVtSRNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
.\tl N(). 36. 199tt
NA’rloNAL  WATER ACT. 1998
((’J
“dam w itb a stitety risk” nwans any dwn-
( i ) which can contain, store or dam more than 50 ()()() cubic metres of’ water,
whc[hcr that waler conttiins any substance or not, and which has a wall of’
a t crtical height of more than tive metres, measured us [he vertical
di fikrencc between the lowest downstream ground elevation on [he
[m[sicfe of {he daITI wall and the non-overspill  crest level or the gener-d
lop [CVCI of” the dwn Wid];
(ii ) belonging to a ctitegory of’ dilms declared under section I I 8(2) to be
dwns w itb d safety risk; or
(iii ) dcctarcd under section I I 8(3)(o) to be J ~wn with J saf’et~ risk;
(1/)
“owner of a dam” or “owner of’ a dam with a sid’ety risk” inclLldes the person
in control 01 thtit dam; and
((’)
“t:lsk” includes a task relating to designing, constructing. altering, repairing,
impounditlg water in, operating, evaluating the safety of, maintaining,
monitoring or ahimdoning a clam with a saf’cty risk.
Control measures for dam with safety risk
118. ( 1 ) The owner of’ a dwn must-
([1) within the period specified, provide the Minister with tiny information,
dmwirrgs, specifications, design assumptions, calcultitions, documents and
test results requested by the Minister; or
(I)) give any person authorised by the Minister access to that dam, to enable the
Minister to determine whether—
(i) that darn is a clam with a safety risk;
(ii) tlmt darn should be decltired to be a dam with a safety risk;
(iii) a directive should be issLled for specifrc repairs or alterations to that dam;
or
(iv) the owner’ has complied with tiny provisiotls of this Act tipplicable to th~t
darn.
(~) The Mlr]ls[er  m~y by nof]ce in [he ~u:~ff~ &cl~r~ ~ Cfltegory of dtiuIs to be da[ll>
with a safety risk.
(3) The Minister may-
(u) by writ(en notice to the owner of a dam, declare that dam to be a dam with u
safety risk;
(b) direcl the owner of’ a darn with a safety risk to submit, at the owner’s cost, and
within a period specified by the Minister, a report by an tipproved  prot’essionai
person regarding the safety of that dam; or
(c) direct the owner of a dam with a safety risk to undertake, at the owner’s cost,
and within a period specified by the Minister, any specific repairs or
alterations [o that darn which are necessary to protect the public, property or
the resource quality from a risk of failure of the dwm.
(4) lf the owner of the dam fails to comply with the directive contemplated in
subsection (3)(t’) within the period specified, [he Minister may under[tihe  the rcptiirs or
:dtertit ions turd recover lhe costs trom the owner.
(5) Before issuing u directive, the Minister must-
(a) be satisfied [hat the reptiirs or alterations directed are necessary, adequate,
etfective and appropriate to reduce the risk to an acceptable level; and
(h) consider the impact on public safety, property, the resource quality and
soci{)-cc(~]]otl]ic” aspects if the dam ti~ils.
Responsibilities of approved professional persons
119. ( 1 ) When carrying (mt J task in terms of this Chupter, an approved prot’essiomd
pcrs<)n tilso has a duIy of” care towards the State and the general public.
5
I ()
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 61 ---

12(1
N{] 191S2
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUG[JST  1998
Act No. 36, 1998
N/WIONA[. WATER ACT. 1998
(2) An approved prt)lcssional person appointed to curry out a Iask on a dam must—
((~) tnsure thut the iask is carried out according to acceptable dam engineering
prwlices;
(b) keep the prescribed records;
(t) compile the prescribed reports; and
{d) where the task includes constructing, altering or repairing a dam, issue a
completion certificate to the owner of’ the dwn to the efl’ect that the task on that
darn has been carried out according to the applicable design, drawings and
specificati(ms.
(3) An approved professional person appointed to carry out a dam safety evalutition
nlust-
([~) consider whether the safety norms pertaining to the design, construction.
monitoring, operation, performance and maintenance of’ the dam satisfy
acceptable dam engineering practices; and
(b) compile a report on the matters contemplated in paragraph (a) according to the
prescribed requirements tind submit the signed and dated report to the owner
of the dam within the prescribed period.
Registration of dam with safety risk
120. ( I ) The owner of’ u dam with u safety risk must register that dam.
(~) An application  for registration must be  made within 120 days—
(u) ufter the date on which the dam with a safety risk becomes cupable of’
containing, storing or impounding water;
(b) after the date on which an already completed dwn is declared to be a dam with
a safety risk; or
(c) after publication of’ a notice declaring a category of’ dams to be dams with a
safety risk,
as the case may be.
(3) A successor-in-title to an owner of a dam with a safety risk must promptly inform
the Director-Geneml  of the succession, for the substitution of’ the name of the owner.
Factors to be considered in declaring dam or category of dams with safety risk
121. In declaring a category of dams or a dom to be a category of dams or a dam with
a safety risk, the Minister must consider—
(u) the need to protect the public, property and the resource quality aguinst the
potential hazard posed by the dam or category of dwns;
(b) the extent of’ potential loss or harm involved;
({) the cost of any prescribed measures and whether they are reasonably
achievable;
(d) the socioeconomic impact if such a dun] fi~ils; and
(e) in the case of’ a particular dam, also—
(i) the manner in which that dam is designed, constructed, altered, repaired,
operated, inspected, maintained or abtindoned;
(ii) the person by whom that dam is designed, constructed, altered, repaired,
operated, inspected, maintained or abandoned; and
(iii) the manner in which the water is contained, stored or impounded in tha[
dam.
Exemptions
122. ( 1 ) The Minister may exempt owners of dams belonging to certain categories, by
notice in the (l~:elte, from compliance with any provision of this Chapter or any
regLllation made under this Chapter, on conditions determined by the Minister.
(2) The Minister may in writing exempt an owner of a dam belonging to a certain
category from co[npliwwe with any provision of this Chapter on conditions determined
by the Minister.
5
1 ()
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 62 ---

I 2?
N(), 10 I X2
GOVE tNMENT  GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 1998
Ac! N(). M. lWll
NATIONAL WATER ACT. 1998
(3) The Minister may withdraw (be exemplion or imp ~se further or new conditions in
respect of” the exempti(m,
(4) Bet’urc deciding un an exemptiun.  the Minister n ust consider—
(a) [he degree  ut’ risk or potcntiul  risk pod by t )e dam or category of’ dalns  10
public satkty, pruperty and the resource quality:
(/)) the manner (~t’ design, cunstructiun.  altcratiun repair, impoundment of water
in, operation or abandonment of the darn ur c ltegory of dams;
(() the supervision invulved in the dam or ca(egcry  of’ darns;
(d) alternative measures pruposed fur regulating the design. construction,
alteration, repair, operation. maintenance. ilm~ uundment  of’ water in, inspcc-
tiun or abandunrnent  of’ the darn ur categury o darns and the effectiveness ut’
these measures;
(e) the knowledge and expertise ofthe  persuns in~ .>lved in any task relating tu the
dam or cfitegory  of’ darns:
(f) the costs relating tu the darn or categury of d; ms;
(s) any security provided ur intended tu be provid :d fur any damage which could
be caused by the dam or category of’ dams: ar d
(h) whether the dam ur cti{egory of dams are perrn tted in terms ut’ a licence ur any
other authuriwrtion issued by or under any otl er Act.
Regulations regarding dam safety
123. ( I ) The Minister may make regulations-
fur t h e  e s t a b l i s h m e n t  ut’ u register of appr )VCU prof’essiumd persuns fur
dealing with datns with a safety risk—
(i) pruvicting  for-
((~d) dif~erent classes of appruved profes ;iunal persons;
(M) the tasks or categury uf tasks which eoch class of apprt)vcd
pr(]fessiunal  persuns may perfurrn; Ind
([() the cumtitions under which each ( lass of approved professional
persons nmy pert’orm tiny task or c: tegory of’ tasks;
(ii) concerning the requirements for odmissi m to etch class;
(iii) setting uut, in respect of eirch class. the i mcedure  for-
(CW) approval;
(bb) withdrirwal  ut’ an approval; and
(cc) suspension uf an appruvai; and
(iv) providing for a processing fee fur an ap[ mval;
(/)) regulating the approval of a person as an app ovcd professional person for a
specific task-
(i) setting out the procedure for approval;
(ii) setting out the procedure for canceling i n approval;
(iii) requiring that the approved persun be : ssisted in the task by another
person or a group of persons with specitil experience and qualifications:
and
(iv) providing for a processing fee for an ap~ roval;
(c) in respect of dams with a safety risk—
(i) classifying such dams into categories;
(ii) requiring the owner of a dam of a S[ ecific category to appuint an
approved professional person to—
((M) design that darn or any repair, alterat on or abtindomnent of the (iam:
(M) ensure that a tusk is carried uut WC{ ding tu the applicable design,
drawings and specifications: and
((’c) carry out darn safety evtiluations (m the dam;
(iii) requiring that Iicences be issued by the k ‘inister befur-e any task relating
tu a specific categury  uf doms may cx mmence. and the conditions,
requirements and prucwdure tu obtain an ~ specitic Iicence;
(iv) laying down Iicence conditions and requi ‘ernents that must be met when
czrrying out a task un a specific categor: of’ dams;
5
1 ()
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55


--- PAGE 63 ---

Act No. M. 1998
NATIONA[. WATE : ACT. 1998
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
requiring an approved professional per ion, appointed for a dam of a
specific ca[egory, to keep records 0(’ inl ormation and dmwings,  and to
compile reports;
rcquirin-
(aa) an owner of a dam belonging to a : pecific category of dams; and
(hb) an approved professional person q-pointed for a specific task for a
specific alum.
to submit information, drawings. report: and manuals:
determining the duties (>f—
(act) an owier of a dam belonging to a : pecitic category of darns: and
(bb) an approved professional person ar poi nted for a specific task for a
speciiic dam:
(d) requiring the owner of a dam with u sac :ty risk to accomplish regular
monitoring of the clam. to the extent and mar ner prescribed:
(e) requiring the registration of’ a specific dam w th u safety risk, and setting out
the procedure find the processing fee payttble for registration: and
(f) specifying time periods that must be c(nnplie J with.
(2) In making regulations under subsection ( I )(a). t le Minister must consider—
(a) the expertise required ror the etfective design construction, alteration. repair.
operation, maintenance and abandonment 01’ a dam in the category concerned;
and
(h) the qualifications and experience needed t ~ pro\’ide the expertise for’ a
particular category 01 Iusks.
(3) Belbre making regulati(ms under subsection ( I ), the Minister must consult the
Engineering Council of South Alrica, established by section 2 of the Engineering
Profession of South Africa Act, 1990 (Act No. 114 of I W()), and any other appropriate
statutory professional bodies,
CHAPTER 13
ACCESS ‘1{) ANI) RIGHTS OVER  LAND
Part 1: Entry and in.vpectj on
Part I of this Chapter allows authorised persons to ~ nter and inspect property fbr a
number of parposes associated with implementing t) is Act. The rights of property
owners are protected in that only authorised persons K tay enter and inspect property;
authorised persons must carry a certljicate of authorisation and must produce that
certificate on request; in certain circumstances notice of entry must be given and the
consent of the person owning or occupying the proj )erty must be obtained before
entry; and in certain circumstances a warrant must b ? obtained prior to entry.
Appointment of authorised persons
124. ( I ) The Minister or a water management institut on may, in writing, appoint any
suitable person as an authorised person to perform the tinctions  contemplated in section
125( l), (2) and (3).
(2) An tiuthorised person must be provided with a cert ticate of appointment signed by
or on behalf of the Minister or a water management insti .ution in which the natLlre of the
authorised person’s functions is described.
Powers and duties of authorised persons
,
125. ( I ) An authorised person may. at any reasonabl’ time and without prior notice,
enter or cross a property with the necessary persons, veh cles, equipment and material in
order to carry out routine inspections of the use of watl:r under any authoris:ltion.
5
I ()
Is
20
25
30
35
40
45


--- PAGE 64 ---

I 26
N{). 19182
GOVI ;RNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGLJST 199X
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATE -? ACT, 1998
(2) An authorised person ]nay enter a property with the necessary persons, vehicles,
equipment and material-
([/) after giving reasonable notice to the owner or occupier of the property, which
notice mList state the purpose of the proposetl entry; and
(b) after obtaining the consent of the owner or o :cupier of that property.
in (mlcr t+-
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
clean, repair, maintain, remove or demoli:h any government waterwork
operated by any water management instituti( n;
undertake any work necessary for cleaning, clearing. stabilizing and repairing
the water resource and protecting the resour[ e quality;
establish the suitability of any water resol [rce or site for constructing a
waterwork;
undertake any work necessary to comply with an obligation imposed on any
person under this Act, where that person has failed to fultil that obligation;
erect any structure and to install and operate any equipment on a temporary
basis for monitoring and gathering intormati m on water resources; or
bring hetrvy equipment on to a property or OC( upy a property for any Ien.gtb of
time.
(3) An authorised person may, at any reasonable timl and without prior notice, on the
authority of a warrznt, enter a property with the necess: ry persons, vehicles, equipment
and material, and perform any action necessary to-
(a) investigate \vhether this Act. any condition : ttached to any authorised water
use by or under this Act or any notice or dirt ctive is being contravened;
(b) investigate whether any information supplie ~ in connection with the use of
water is accurate; or
([) carry out any of the activities referred to in subsection (2) where the consent
of the owner or occupier of that property ha! been withheld.
(4) A warrant referred to in subsection (3) must be i ;sued by a judge or a magistrate
who hasjurisdiction  in the area where the property in ql estion is situated. and must only
be issued if it appears from information obtained on o .th that—
(a) there are reasonable grounds for believin:. that this Act, any condition
attached to any authorised water use by or Jnder this Act or any notice or
directive, is being contravened:
(b) there are reasonable grounds for believing t’lat any information supplied in
connection with the use of water is inaccural e; or
(c) it is necessary to carry out an activity mentio led in subsection (2) and access
to that property has been denied.
(5) If a warrant is likely to be issued if applied for bu[ the delay involved in obtaining
a warrant is likely to defeat the object of an inspection in terms of subsection (3)(a) or
(b), ‘an authorised person may enter a property withoul a warrant.
(6) An authorised person entering property in terl m of this section must, at the
request of any person on that property, identify hiloself or herself and present a
certificate of appointment contemplated in section 124 2).
(7) Notwithstanding any provision of this section an authorised person may not,
under any circumstances, enter a dwelling without the clmsent of the occupier or without
a warrant authorizing entry.
Part 2: Servitudes
Part 2 deals with servitudes. A servitude is a right i hat a person has over property
belonging to another person. This Part allows a perso~  ~ who is authorised to use water
under the Act to claim a servitude over another perso, 1‘s land w’here this is necessary
to make that water use effective. For exatnple  it might be necessary to lead water over
another person’s land to take it from the source to th ? authon”sed  water user’s land,
5
IO
Is
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 65 ---

l~x
N{,, 191S2
GOVEI  NMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGLJST }998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAI. WATER  ACT, 1998
and a servitude would be necessary to do this. A servitudz cannot be claimed unless the
claimant is authorised to u,se water, and if the authorisa ion is withdrawn or otherwise
terminated, the servitude will lapse. Servitudes are acqu red by agreement between the
authorised water user and the relevant land owner, either according to existing
procedures laid down in the Deeds Registries Actor by way of an agreement which is 5
made an order of court. Procedural detail.~ regarding th : acquisition of servitudes and
their registration are not set out in this Part but are contained in Schedule 2.
Definitions
126. In this Chapter—
(0)
“servitude oJabutmen[” means the right to mx upy, by means of a waterwork,
I ()
the bed or banks of a stream or adjacent land ~elonging to another;
(/?)
“servitude of aqueduct” means the righ[ to OC( upy land belonging to another
by means of a waterwork  for abstracting or Ie lding water; and
(c)
“servitude of submersion” means the right to occupy land belonging to
another by submerging it under water.
Is
Acquisition of servitudes
127. ( 1 ) A person who is aulhorised under this Act to use water may-
(a) claim a servitude of-
(i) abutment;
(ii) aqueduct: or
20
(iii) submersion; or
(b) obtain an amendment to any existing servit de of abutment, aqoedL[ct or
submersion,
to the extent that this is necessary to give effect to that imthorisatiorr.
(2) The servitude claimed under subsection ( I )(a) may be—
(a} a personal servitude in ftivour of the cl~imant or
(b) a praedial servitude in favour of the claiman in the claimants capacity as
25
owner of property on which
(3) A servitude under (his Chapter
waterwork.
(4) A person who intends to claim
procedure set out in Schedule 2.
the claimant may use the water.
may also be claimed in respect of an existing
30
a servitude uncle r this section must follow the
Rights and duties of servitude holders and landowners
128. ( 1 ) A holder of a servitude contemplated in this C lapter has a reasonable right of
access to the land which is subject to the servitude fcr the purpose of constructing, 35
altering, replacing, inspecting, maintaining,
repairing or operating the relevant
waterwork, or for any other purpose necessary for tt e effective enjoyment of that
servitude.
(2) The holder of a servitude contemplated in this Chapter may, in a reasonable
manner and subject to any other applicable law—
40
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
take from the land subject to the servitud:, any material or substance
reasonably required for constructing, alteril Ig, replacing. maintaining or
repairing any waterwork or part of a water work in respect of which the
servitude has been acquired;
remove and use vegetation or any other obsta( le which is on the land subject 45
to the servitude and which is detrimental to tt e reasonable enjoyment of the
servitude;
deposit on the land subject to the servitu( Ie any material or substance
excavated or removed from the waterwork in the reasonable exercise of the
servitude;
50
occupy, during the period of construction of thf waterwork in respect of which
the servitude has been acquired, as much of d e land subject to the servitude
as may reasonably be required for—
(i) constructing camps or roads;
(ii) constructing houses, reservoirs or other t uildings or structures; or
55


--- PAGE 66 ---

I .3(J
N(I 1°182
(; OVERNNIENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. .36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT. 1998
5
(iii) installing Imachinery or equipment,
necessary for the construction of the waterwork;
(e) occupy, for the duration of the servitude, as much of the land subject to the
ser\itude  as is reasonably required for—
(i) accommodating people;
(ii) workshops: or
(iii) storage purpt)ses.
to the extent [hat lhis is necessary for the control. operti(ion and maintenance
of ihc relevant waterwork.
(3) A holder of u servitude contcmpkrted in this Chapter must, when requested in I ()
Writing by the owner of (he land subject to the servitude, at the holder’s cost-
(a) maintain the servitude areu;
(b) repair anLI maintain waterworks relating to the servitude; and
(() repair and nurintain access roads irssociatccl with the servitude.
(4) If the holder of a Servitude fails to carry out the requested work, the owner of the 15
land may arrange  for the necessary work to be done and may recover any reasontible cost
incurred from the servitude holder.
(5) C)n termination of a scrvittrdc, the holder of the servitude must rehabilitate the
land subject {() the servitude to the extent that this is reasonably possible.
Procedure for acquisition and amendment of servitudes
129. ( I ) A servitude con[etnplated  in (his Chapter inuy be acquired or w amendment
t)r cancellation of a wrvituclc (~btaincd by—
(a) executing and registering an applicable deed in terms of the Deeds Registries
Act, 1937 (Act No 47 ot’ 1937); or
(b) by means of an order of a High Court.
(2) A person claiming a servitude or an amendment of a servitude under this Chapter
nmy, on rcitsontibie notice to the kmdowner-
(a) enter;
(/J) make wry investigation; and
(L) undertake tiny opemtion,
30
on the land which will be subject to the servitude, where this is reasonable in the
circumstances and necessary for determining the nature and extent of the servitude and
for complying with item 3 ot’ Schedule 2.
(3) A person ~cting under subsection (2) must-
(~1) caLIse as little dwnage as possible to the Iund; and
(b) where any damage is ctiLIsed—
(i) repair the damage  where possible; or
(ii) pay compensation to the landowner in an agreed amount or an amount
determined by a competent coLlrt.
(4) An owner of the land against which a servitude contemplated in this Chtiptcr is 40
claimed. may claim to share in the use of tiny proposed watcrwork relating to the
servitude if—
(~{) the owner of the land is tiuthoriscci to usc wutcr from a specific water resource;
(b) the usc ()(’ the waterwork is compatible with the tiuthor-ised water use; and
(c) the owner of the land agrees to be responsible for-a proportionate shure of’ [he 45
cost of’ cons{ ructin,g. repairing and maintaining the watcrwor-k.
(5) A claim to shart in the use of a waterwork under subsection (4) must be dealt
wit b-
([1) in tbe agreement between the parties: or
(b) in u High C~mrt order contemplated in section 130.
Powers of High Court in respect of claim for servitude
35
50
130. on hearing a claim for u servitude or for an amendment to a servitude in terms
of this Chapter, a High Court mtiy -
([[) award the cltiim with or without modifications, on such terms as it considers
just:
55


--- PAGE 67 ---

I 32
N,). Ivlx?
{; OV1:RNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
/icl ho. 36, 199tt
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
(l)) divard ct)mpensali[m or refuse to award compenwlion;
(t) determine wbcther a proportionate amount of”compcnsation should be paid [{)
the holder of” a right of’ lease, mortgage, usulruct or similar’ light over the
pr(y)crty, and order tbtit such compensation be paid; or
(d) dismi~s [be claim.
Compensation payable for- granting of servitudes
131. ( 1 ) In determining just and equitable compensation a High Court must take into
accxmnt till relevant t’actors including, in addition to the matters contemplated in section
25 of [he C~nstitution_
((1)
(h)
(1’)
(d)
(t’)
(./)
(s)
(}/)
(i)
(~) A
the nature of’ the servitude or amendment, including the nuture and function of
the waterwork relating to the servitude or amendment;
whether any existing waterwork  will be used to give elfect to the servitude;
(he probable durotion of the servitude;
the extent of the deprivation of use of the land likely to be suflered as a result
of the servitude or amendment;
the rental value of’ the IA atlected by the servitude or amendment;
the nature and extent of the actual inconvenience or loss likely to be sutl’ered
as a result of the exercise of’ the rights under [he servitude or amendment;
the extent to which the kmd can reasonably be rehabilitated on termination of’
the servitude;
any advantage tbot the landowner, or other person with u compensatahle
interest in the land subject to the servitude, is likely to derive as a result of the
servitude or wnenchnent; and
the public interest served by the waterwork relating to the servitude or
trmendment.
High Court may determine the time and manner of payment of’ the
compensation.
Noting of servitude and amendment by endorsement a~ainst title deed
132. ( I ) The acquisition. amendment or cancellation of a servitude by virtue of an
order of the High Court ttikes effec[ when the order is noted in terms of the Deeds
Registries Act, 1937, (Act No. 47 of 1937).
(2) Nothing in this section prevents a person Iron] electing to register [he acquisition,
amendment or ctincelltition of’ u servitude in accordance with the Deeds Registries Ac[,
1937 (Act No. 4701 1937).
Cancellation of servitude
133. An owner of land subject to u servitude of abu[ment. aqueduct or subnwrsit)n
may-
(t~) it the relevant twthorisatioo associated with the servitude is terminated:
(b) if the rights and obligations in respect of’ [be servitude hiivc not been exercised
on the [and subject to the servitude for :1 continuous period of three years: (w
(() Ior wly other l:lwfLIl  rewon,
:Ipply to a High Court (or the canceiltition of’ that servitude.
Joint water-work involving servitude
134. Subject to CIulpter 4. two or more persons who we nuthorised to USC water nlily
agree to-
({1) cxmstrucl a joint waterwork; iind
(b) create :i wrvitudc associated with that waterwork,  ~
[~) give eil’cct to tbcir aLlth(miscd wfiter use.
5
1 ()
15
20
15
30
35
40
4s


--- PAGE 68 ---

I {4
!s(,, l~)lx2
(; OVERNMEN’r (; AZETTE, 26 AtJG[JST 1998
.ACI No. 36, IY98
NATIONAL WATER ACT, ) 998
Part 3: Waterworks and personal servitudes
Part 3 deals with ownership and restoration relating to waterworks placed on the
land of another, and creates an exception to the general common law rule that
per.sotzal  servitudes are not transferable from the holder to another person. It allows
transfers of personal servitudes that are held by the State and water management
institutions.
Ownership of waterworks on land belonging to another
135. ( I ) A water management institution (including the State)—
(a) retains ownership of a waterwork placed in good faith on land belonging to
another;
(b) may remove such a waterwork from the land; and
(c) may tmnsfer the rights held in respect of improvement on such land to another
person or authority.
(2) When a waterwork is removed under subsection (I )(b), the owner of the
property—
(a) may require the Minister or the water management institution concerned to
restore, as far as possible, any physical damage to the land caused by the
removal; and
(b) has no other claim against the Minister or’ the water management institution
concerned.
(3) The rights of the State or’ a water management institution in respect of improve-
ments on property not owned hy the State or the institution may be transferred to another
person or authority.
Transfer of personal servitudes
136. ( 1 ) Despite any law to the contrary, a personal servitude, whether registered or
not, held by the Minister or a water management institution may be transferred—
(u) from the Minister to a water management institution; or
(b) from a water management institution to the Minister or to another wuter
management institution.
(2) The relevant Registrar of Deeds must register a notarially executed deed of
cession to transfer a registered personal servitude in terms of subsection ( 1 ).
CHAPTER 14
MONITORING, ASSESSMENT AND INFORMATION
Monitoring, recording, assessing and disseminating information on water re-
sources is critically important for achieving the objects of the Act. Part 1 of this
Chapter places a duty on the Minister, as soon as it is practicable to do so, to establish
national monitoring systems. The purpose of the systems will be to facilitate the
continued and co-ordinated monitoring of various aspects of water resources by
collecting relevant information and data, through established procedures and
rnechanistns,  from a variety of sources including organs of state, water management
institutions and water users.
Part 1: National monitoring systems
Establishment of national monitoring systems
137. ( I ) The Minister must establish national monitoring systems on water resources
as soon os reasonably practicable.
(2) The systems must provide for the collection of appropriate data and information
necessary to assess, among other matters—
((~) the quantity of water in the various water resoLlrces:
(b) the quality of water resources;
(c) the use of water resources;
(d) the rehabilitation of water resources;
5
‘)5
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 69 ---

I 30
N,). l~)lx’1
(;ov EKNM[iNI’  GAzFITl:,  26 A(JG(Js’I 19’)8
Ad N(). .M, 1998
N/KTloNAl.W  ATI!R/\(’T,  1998
(c) ctll}llJli;ltlce witllresLJurce  ql[:ili[y (]hjcctives;
(/) lllcllcttlll] (Ji’iiqll:ltic ectJsystcllls: :~lld
(,q) uttl~osl}llericc t)llditic)llsw llich ll~tiyi[lflucilce  water resol]rces.
Establishment of’ mechanisms to co-ordinate monitoring of water resources
138. The Minister mtts[, titter consulltilion wi[h relevant-
((/) organs ol’s(il(e;
(l)) w:l[crillan:igelllenl  institotims;  a n d
({) cxislillg:lt~d ll(~tc[](iill usersol’water,
est:d>lish mcchiulisn~> d procedures  to co-ordinate lhe lmoni toring of’ wutcr resources.
Part 2: National inforntati onsystemson  water-resources
Part 2 requires the Minister, as soon as it impracticable to do so, to establish
national information systems, each covering a different aspect of water resources,
such asa nationa  lregisterof  water use authorisations, a-an information systetn on
thequantity  andquality  ofall water resources. The Minister mayreqaire  anyperson
to provide the Department with information prescribed by the Minister in regulations.
In addition to its use by the Department and water management institutions, and
subject to any limitations imposed by law, information in the national systems should
be generaIly  accessible for use by water users and the general public.
Establishment of national information systems
139. ( 1 ) The Minis{er Inus(, m soon” as reasonably practicable, establish nati(mal
inl’(mnotion systems I-egwding wutcr resoLlrces.
(2) The information systems may include, among others-
(~{) a hychwlogic:d inf’orrnittion system;
(b) a water resource quulily infornuttion system;
(c) a groundwtiter informtition system; and
(d) a register O{ w~ter use authorisations.
Objectives of national information systems
140. The objectives of ntitionol information systems are-
to store itml provide data and inlormalioo  Ior the prt)tec[ioo,  sustainable use
and mtinagernent of water resources;
to provide information for the development :md implementation of the
naiiomtl water resource strategy; and
to provide information to wmer mitmtgemcnt institLitions, water users and the
public—
(i) Ior research oocl development;
(ii) lor planning and environment impact assessments;
(iii) Ior public safety ml Llisuster maoagemcnt;  and
(iv) on the stalus of w~tcr resources.
Provision of information
141. The Minister may require in writing that imy person must, within Li reusonahle
gi\cll [Ime ~>r 011 ~ r~gl[l:lr b;l~is, provide the Dq):lr-tmcnt with JOy dtita, inlbr’mation,
docuincnts,  swnp]cs (w mi)teriais  reasonably required for-
(~~) the purposes t)t’ tiny na(ional monitoring network  (w national information
system; or
(b) the mimilgcmcnt  wld protection 01 w:itcr resources.
Access to int’ormation
142. lnf(mmitit~n cont:tincd in any national inkmna~ion system established in terms OJ
5
I ()
Is
20
30
35
40
45


--- PAGE 70 ---

] lx
N(). 101X2
(;OV[ RNMEN1-l’ (; AZFTTE, 26 A[~G[~ST  19{)8
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL W’AIE [ A[”T.  199X
this Chapter mLlst be made available by the Minister, su )ject to any limitations imposed
by law. and the payment of a reasonable charge deterrr ined by the Minister.
Regulations for monitoring, assessment and inform: kion
143. The Minister may make regulations prescribing —
((t) guidelines, procedures, standards and methots for monitoring; and
(h) the nature, type, time period and format of dat:[ to be submitted in terms of this
Chapter,
Part 3: Information on bloodlines, jloo, Is and droughts
Part 3 requires certain information relating to j700Ls, droughts and potential risks
to be made available to the public. Township layout vlans must indicate a spectjic
floodline. Water management institutions must use tie most appropriate means to
inform the public about anticipated jloods, droughts t r risks posed by water quality,
the failure of any dam or any other waterworks or my other related matter. The
Minister may establish ear[y warning systems to anticipate such events.
Bloodlines on plans for establishment of townships
144. For the purposes of ensuring that al I persons wh] might be afrected have access
to information regarding potential flood hazards, no pi rson may establish a township
unless the layout plan shows, in a form acceptable to the local authority concerned, lines
indicating the maximum level likely to be reached by loodwaters  on average once in
every I ()() years.
Duty to make information available to public
14S. ( I ) A water management institution must, at its ( wn expense. make information
at its disposal available to the public in an appropriate nanner, in respect of—
([i) a flood which has occurred m which is likely to occur;
(h) a drought which has occurred or which is Iikl Iy to occur;
(c) a waterwork which might fail or has failed, if the failure might endanger life
or property;
(d) any risk posed by any dam;
(e) levels likely to be reached by floodwaters fro n time to time;
(~) any risk posed by the quality of any water to life, health or property: and
(g) any matter connected with water or water reso mces, which the public needs to
know.
(2) The Minister may, where reasonably practicab e, esttiblish an early warning
system in relation to the events contemplated in subset ion ( I).
CHAPTER 15
APPEALS AND DISPUTE RIM( )LUTION
This Chapter establishes the Water Tribunal to hear appeals against certain
decisions made by a responsible authority, catchment management agency or water
management institution under this Act. The Tribunal ~s an independent body, whose
members are appointed through an independent sele, “tion process, and which may
conduct hearings throughout the Republic. A person may appeal to a High Court
against a decision of the Tribunal on a question of Iau’. This Chapter also provides for
disputes to be resolved by mediation, if so directed by he Minister.
Establishment of Water Tribunal
I o
15
20
25
30
35
40
146. ( 1 ) The Water Tribunal is hereby established.
45


--- PAGE 71 ---

t 40
N(), 19182
GOV} :RNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(). M, 1998
NATIONAL WATE { ACT, 1998
(2) The Tribumd  is an indeperrden[  body whicb—
(u) has jurisdiction in all the provinces of the Rt public; and
(b) may conduct hearings anywhere in the Repu ~lic.
(3) The Tribunal consists of u chairperson. a de! wty chairperson and as many
additional members as the Minister considers necessar /.
5
(4) Members of the Tribunal must have knowlec ge in law, engineering, water
resfmrcc management or related fields of’ knowledge.
(5) The chairperson, the deputy chairperson and he additional members of the
Tribunal are appointed by the Minister on the recomm mdation of the Judicial Service
Commission contemplated in section 178 of the Const tution.
10
(6) The chairperson and the deputy chairperson rna.i be appointed in a full-time or
part-time capacity while the additional members must be appointed in a part-time
capacity.
(7) The Minister must determine the employment co lditions and the remuneration of
the chairperson, the deputy chairperson and all otht r members of the Tribunal in 15
consultation with the Minister of Finance.
(8) The Minister may, after consultation with tht Judicial Service Commission
referred to in subsection (5), and after giving the mtmber  an opportunity to make
representations and considering such representations, for good reason terminate the
appointment of any member of the Tribunal.
20
Operation of Water Tribunal
147. ( I ) Subject to section 146(4), after having cc nsidered the necessary field of
knowledge for the purposes of hearing a particula matter, the chairperson may
nominate one or more members of the Water Tribunal t( hear a matter and a decision by
such member or members constitutes a decision by the Tribunal.
25
(2) Administrative support for the Tribunal must )e provided by oflicials of the
Department designated by the Director-General, subje ot to the laws pertaining to the
secondment of oflicers in the Public Service.
(3) The expenditure of the Tribunal must be defraye ~ out of money appropriated by
Parliament for that put-pose or from any other source.
30
(4) Neither the Tribunal, the chairperson, the deF uty chairperson nor any other
member is liable for an act or omission committed in good faith while performing a
function in terms of this Act.
Appeals to Water Tribunal
148. ( 1 ) There is an auueal to the Water Tribunal —
35
(a)
(b)
((’)
(d)
(f’)
(f)
(,q)
(/1)
against a directive issued by a catchment ma lagement agency under section
19(3) or 20(4)(d), by the recipient thereofi
against a claim by a catchment management tgency for the recovery of costs
under section 19(5) or 20(7) by the person al fected thereby;
against the apportionment by a catchment m magement agency of a liability 40
for costs under section 19(8) or 20(9), by a F erson affected thereby;
against a decision of a water management inst tution on the temporary transfer
of a water use authorisation under section 25(I), by a person affected thereby;
against a decision of a responsible authority c n the verification of a water use
under section 35 by a person affected thereb! ;
45
against a decision of a responsible authority on an application for a Iicence
under section 41, or on any other application to which section 41 applies, by
the applicant or by any other person who 1 as timeously lodged a written
objection against the application;
against a preliminary allocation schedule pub] ished by a responsible authority 50
under section 46( I ), by any interested persor;
against the amendment of a condition of a Iic ence by a responsible authority
on review under section 49(2), by any persol affected thereby;


--- PAGE 72 ---

!42
N,). 1° I X2
(;()\Jl RNMENT  C, AZETT’E. 26 ALIGIIST  199X
Act No. .\f). 1998
NATK)NA1.  WATE { ACT. 199X
(i)
against a decision of a responsible authorit:  J cm an adjudication of claims
made under section 51 ( I ), by any person afft cted thereby;
(j) against a directive issued by a responsible al thority  under section 53(I), by
the recipient thereofi
(k) against a claitn  by a water management institution for the recovery of COSIS 5
under section 53(2)({/),  by the person against whom the claim is made;
(1) against a decisitm by a responsible authority on the suspension, withdrawal or
reinstatement of an entitlement Lmder sectic n 54, or on the surrender of a
licence under section 55. by the person entitle I to use water or by the licensee:
and
10
(w) against a declaration made by. directive gi\ en by or costs claimed by the
Minister in respect of a dalm with a safety risk under section 1 I 8(3) or (4).
(2) An appeal llnLicr subsectit)rl(l)—
(a) doesnotsuspe  ndadirecti vegivenund ersecti,m 19(3), 20(4) (d)or53(l); :ltl~l”
(h) suspends any other relevant decision, dirtction, requirement. limitation, 15
prohibition or allocation pending the disp~wal of the appeal, unless the
Minister directs otherwise.
(3) Allappe:ll lllLlst becomll~enced\  vitllin 30days:tler-
(({) puhlicatior roftheciecision in the Ga:efle;
(h) llotice[~ltlledecision” issellt t(jtlle:lpi>cll:ltlt or
20
(t) reasons for the decisi(m arc given,
whichever txxurs last.
(4) The procedure for Ioclging. hearing and deciding —
(t{) :I)lappe:ll unciersljhsectioll(  l)::lnd
(b) an:lpplicati()n f(~rthe deterI~lin:lti{~  n(>fc(J1np:ns:iti()  nundersection  22,
’25
is contained in Part 2 of Schedule 6.
(5) The chairperson may make rules which—
(a) govern the procedure of the Tribunal. includir g the procedure for lodging and
opposing an appeal or an application and the learing thereof by the Tribunal:
(h) may provide for application or appeal fees pa! able by a claimant or appellant: 30
and
(c) must be approved and published in the Gazelle by the Minister.
Appeals from decisions of Water Tribunal
149. ( 1 ) A party to a matter in which [he Water Tribt nal—
(a) has given a decision on appeal under seclioo 148. may, on a question of law, 35
appeal to a High Court against that decision; or
(h) has determined the liability for compensation or the amount of compensation
under section 22(9). may, on a question of’ Iav i appeal to a High Court against
that determination.
(2) The appeal must be noted in writing within 2 I d~ ys of the date of the decision of 40
the Tribunal.
(3) The notice of appeal must—
(a) set out every question of law in respect of wl{ich the appeal is lodged:
(b) set out the grounds for the appeal;
(c) be lodged with the relevant High Court and \ ith the Water Tribunul: and
45
(d) he served on every party to the matter,
(4) The appeal must be prosecuted as if it were an al lpeul from a Magistrate’s Court
to a High Court.
Mediation
150. ( I ) The Minister may at any time and in respt ct of any dispute between any 50
persons relating to any matter contemplated in this i .ct, at the request of a person
involved or on the Minister’s own initiative, direct that t Ie persons concerned tittempt to
settle thcil- dispLlte through n process of mediation and negotiation.
(2) A directive under subsection ( I ) must specify the time when and the place where
sLIch process must start.
55


--- PAGE 73 ---

I 44
No, 191R2
(;OVE  {NMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATE} ACT, 1998
(3) Unless the persons concerned have informed th t Minister at least seven days
befbre the date specified in terms of’ subsection (2) that I Iey have appointed o mediator.
the Minister must appoint a mediator.
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (.; ), the parties may i t any time during the course of
meditation or negotiation proceedings, by agreement I etween them, appoint another
person to act as mediator.
(5) A person appointed by the Minister in terms ofs ~bsection (3) must either be an
official of the Department or an independent mediator.
(6) Where the Minister or the Department is a party t ) the dispute, the mediator may
not be an ollicial of the Department.
(7) The contents of all discussions which took plilce md of” all submissions made as
part of a mediation process under this section are prit ileged in law, and may not be
received in evidence by any court of law, unless the pw ties agree otherwise.
(8) The fees and expenses of a mediator must be paid by—
((7) the Department, if the Minister has appointed the mediator; or
(h) the parties, if they have appointed the rnediat )r.
CHAPTER 16
OFFENCES AND REMED IIM
In common with other Acts of Parliament which a m to make non-compliance a
criminal ofence,  this Chapter lists the acts and omiss ons which are offences  under
this Act, with the associated penalties. It also gives the ~ourts and water management
institutions certain powers associated with prosecution; for these ofiences,  such as the
power to remove the cause of a stream jlow reduction.
Offences
151. ( 1 ) No person may—
(a)
(h)
(c)
((1)
(P)
(t)
(x)
(/1)
(i)
(j)
(L’)
(1)
(m)
use water otherwise than as permitted under t lis Act:
fail to provide access to any btwks, accour ts, documents or assets when
required to do so under this Act;
Fail to comply with any c(mdition attached to [ permitted water use under !bis
Act;
fail to comply with a directive issued under s :ction 19, 20.53 or I I 8;
unlawfully and intentionally or negligently tamper or interlere with any
waterwork or any seal or measuring de\’ice aI [ached to a waterwork;
fail or refuse to give data or information, or give ftilse or misleading data or
informiltion when required to give information I under this Act;
fail to register an existing l~wful water use v hen required by a responsible
authority to do so;
intentionally refuse to perform a duty, or ok struct any other person in the
exercise of any power or performance of any )f that person’s duties in terms
of this Act;
unlawfully and intentionally or negligently C(N lmit any act or omission which
pollutes or is likely to pollute a water resourc:;
unlawfully and intentionally or negligently co] lmit any act or omission which
detrimentally tiffects or is likely to affect a w: ter resource;
Pail to register a dam with a safety risk:
fail to comply with a temporary restriction on t ~e use of water in terms of item
6 of Schedule 3; or
commit contempt of the Water Tribunal.
(2) Any person who contravenes any provision of subsection ( I ) is guilty of an
offence and liable, on the first conviction, to a fine or mprisonment  for a period not
exceeding five years, or to both a tine and such imprisonn lent and. in the case of a second
or subsequent conviction, to a fine or imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years
or to both a tine and such imprisonment.
5
[()
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50


--- PAGE 74 ---

I 46
No. 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(J. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
Enquiry in respect of compensation for harm, loss or damage suffered
152. Where any person is convicted of an offence under this Act and—
(u) another person has sutiered harm or loss as a result of the act or omission
constituting the offence; or
(b) damage has been caused to a water resource,
the Court may, in the same proceedings—
(i) at the written request of the person who suffered the harm or loss; or
(ii) at the written request of the Minister in respect of the damage caused to a
water resource; and
(iii) in the presence of the convicted person,
enquire without pleadings into the harm, loss or damage and determine the extent
thereof.
Award of damages
153. After making a determination in terms of section 152, the Court may —
(a) award damages for the loss or harm suflered by the person referred to in
section 152 against the accused;
(b) order the accused to pay for the cost of any remedial measures implemented
or to be implemented; and
(c) order that the remedial measures to be implemented, be undertaken either by
the accused or the relevant water management institution.
Offences in relation to employer and employee relationships
154. Whenever an actor omission by an employee or agent—
(a) constitutes an offence in terms of this Act, and takes place with the express or
implied permission of the employer or principal, as the case may be, the
employer or principal, as the case may be, is, in addition to the employee or
agent, liable to conviction for that offence; or
(b) would constitute an offence by the employer or principal, as the case may be,
in terms of this Act, that employee or agent will in addition to that employer
or principal be liable to conviction for that otfence.
Interdict or other order by High Court
155. A High Court may, on application by the Minister or the water management
institution concerned, grant an interdict or any other appropriate order against any
person who has contravened any provision of this Act, including an order to discontinue
any activity constituting the contravention and to remedy the adverse effects of the
contravention.
CHAPTER 17
GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
This Chapter contains a number of unrelated provisions which, being of general
importance to the Act as a whole, are less suited to other Chapters. They relate, among
other things, to the binding of all organs of state, to delegations, to the amendment
and substitution of legal instruments, to the limitation of liability, and to the
authorisation and service of documents. The Chapter refers to the list, in Schedule 7,
of la ws or parts of la ws which are repealed by this Act and which will no longer have
efect. Howeveq any act performed under a repealed law remains valid if not
inconsistent with this Act and until overridden by this Act. Regulations made under
repealed laws also remain valid if not inconsistent with this Act and until repealed by
the Minister. This Chapter also provides for overriding any provision in a prior law
which exempts a person from payment of a charge or limiting payment to a jixed
charge for water use.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45


--- PAGE 75 ---

I 48
N(). 191X2
GOVERNMI~NTG AZETlE,26A(JGll  Sl 11)98
,*L4 N().3fJ, 1998
NATIONAI, WATEKACT  1998
Purt 1: Liability
State hound
156, This Act binds al] organs of state.
Limitation of liability
157. Neither the State nor any other person is liable for tiny damage or loss caused
by—
(u) the exercise ot’ any power or the performance of any duty in terms of this Act:
or
(b) the failure to exercise any power, or perform any duty in terms of this Act,
unless the exercise of’ or tiilure to exercise the power, or pcrfornurncc or ftiihrre to
perform the duty was unlawful, negligent or in bud faith.
Amendment or substitution of instruments
158. ( 1 ) For the purposes of this section, “instrument” includes any regulation,
strategy, Iicence, directive or notice made, determined, issued or given in terms of this
Act.
(2) 1~ the proposed amendment or substitution of an instrument-
(u) is not likely to alter the rights and obligations of tiny person materially:
(b} corrects any clerical mistake, unintentional error or omission in an instrument;
(c) corrects any tigure rnisctilculated in an instrument; or
(d) corrects any rnisdescription  of wry person, thing or property,
the amendment or substitution muy be made without following the proccdLrre required
for establishing or giving ettect to the instrument.
Effect of delegation
159. Where a power is conferred  on u person to dclegute the exercise O( u power then,
unless the contrary intention appears-
(u)
(b)
(c)
such a delegation does not prevent the exercise O( that power. or the
performance of that duty by the person who made the delegation;
such a delegation may be made subject to such conditions or limitations as the
person making that delegation mtiy specify; and
a power so delegtited, when exercised or performed by the delegatee, must be
re”garded m ha~rng been exercised or performed by” the person making the
delegation.
Part 2: Powers aud authorisatious
Documents deemed to be properly authorised and issued
160. ( I ) A notice, directive or other document issLwd in terms ot this Act in good f’aith
by any water management institution and purporting to have hecn signed by the
chairperson, secretary or chict’ executive officer of the institution mus[ be r~gi]rdd as
having been properly outhorised und issued in terms of a valid decisi{m, until evidence
to the contrary is adduced.
(2) Any document issued in terms of this Act without authority may be ratifie[i
subsequently.
Documents and steps valid under cer~ain circumstances
161. ( I ) A nL)ticc, direclive or other document issued in god faith in terms of this Act,
but which does not comply with this Act, is valid if the non-complifince is not muterid
and does not pre,judicc any person.
5
1()
15
Z()
25
30
35
40


--- PAGE 76 ---

15[)
N() 191x2
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AI.JGLJST  I YX+
—
Ad No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER  AC’r, 1998
(z) ‘rhc  [’:li[llrc I() [kc tiny sleps required in terms of this Act as a prerequisite Ior any
decisitm or :Ic[itm does not inv:didu(e [be deci~ion or action ii’ the Failure—
((/) ii nt)l nlateriul;
(b) hil\ subwqucntly been rectihed; and
(t) does m)[ prejudice my person.
5
(3) A t’uilurc in good Iiiitb to comsult with or send nolice to any relevant person or
body LLS required by this Act does n(N invAidate any act of or process for which such
cx)nsullalion is a prerequisite.
Service of documents
162. ( I ) Any notice, direc[ive or other document in terms of this Act, must be I ()
scrvcd—
(ti) if it is to be served on a natural person-
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(b) it’ it
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
by hand delivery [o that person;
by hand delivery to a responsible individual al that person’s business or
residential address;
Is
by sending it by registered mail to that person’s business or residential
address; or
where that person’s business tind residential address is unknown. despite
reasonttblc enquiry, by publishing ii once in the Ga~,cfl< and once in a
Ioctii newspaper circulating in the area of that person’s last known 20
residential or business address; or
is intended kr a juristic person-
by hund deli\ery  to u responsible individual tit the registered address {~r
principtil place of business of that juristic person;
by sending it by facsimile to the registered address or principal place of 25
business of that juristic person;
by sending it by registered mail to the registered address or principtil
place ot’ business ot’ that juristic person;
by conspicuously attachirlg it to the muin cntrunce of (he registered
wldrcss or the principal place of business of that juristic person; or
30
by htind delivery tt~ :my mernbet- ot’ th:it jLlristic person’s btxtrd of’
direclors or governing body.
(2) Any notice, directive or other document served wwrding  to subsection ( 1 ) is
considered to have come to the notice ot’ the person, unless the contrwy  is proved.
Repeal of laws, and savings
35
163. ( 1 ) The laws sel out in Schedule 7 arc hereby repe~lled to the extent set f)tlt in tll~
third column ol that Schedule,
(2) This Act overrides tiny provision in o prior Itiw cxempling  u person from paynwn[
of:1 charge, or limiting payment to a Iixed chiu?ge for water usc
(3) Anything done under a law repe:ded by this Act remains vt]lid—
40
(~1) to the extent that it is not inconsistent wi[h thi$ Act; :md
(h) until anylhin:  done under this Ac( overrides it.
(4) Any regulation mwic under a law repealed by this Ac( remains in (brce wd is
corlsidercd to have been made under this Act—
(a) to the extent that it is not inconsistent with this Act; and
45
(b) until it is repealed by the Minister under this Act.
Short title and commencement
164. This is the Nation:d  W~ter Act, 1998, which takes elt’ec[ on a date fixed by the
President by proclmnati(m  in the Gti:,cI[cJ.


--- PAGE 77 ---

}5?
N(I 101X2
GOVERNMENT  (; AZJ3TTE, 26 A(JGLIST  1998
Act N(J. M, 1998
NATIONAI. WArER  ACT, 1998
Schedule 1
PERMISSIBLE USE OF WATER
Iscctions41 J ml 22( I )((~)(i)  ml Item ? Of schedule  s I
( 1 ) A person may, subject to this Act—
(a) tirke water for reasonable domestic use in that person’s household, directly
from any wtiter. resource to which that person hits lawful access;
(b) !akc water for use on Iund owned or occupied by thtit pcrwn, for —
(i) rewonablc domestic use:
(ii) small gardening not for commercial purpmws; and
(iii) the watering of animals (excluding fecdlots) which graze tm Ihist Iund
within the grazing ctipacity of that land,
From any water resource which is situated on or forms a boundary of that land.
if the use is not excessive in relation to [he cupacity of the wwer resource and
the needs of’ olher users;
(,) store and USC run-off water from a roofi
(d) in emergency situations, take water from any water resource for human
consumption or tireiighling;
(e) Ior recretrtiomrl purposes-
(i) use the water or the water surface of a water resource to which th:it
person htts lilWfUl  access;  or
(ii ) portage any boat or canoe on any land adjacent to a watercourse in order
10 continue bwrting on that watercourse; and
()) discharge —
(i) waste or water containing waste; or
(ii) run-off water, including storrnwater  from any residential, recreational,
commerciut or industrial site,
into a canal, sea outfd I or other conduit controlled by another person
authorised to undertake the purification, treatment or disposal of wtiste or
water containing waste, subject to the approval of the person controlling the
canal, sea outfall or other conduit.
(2) An entitlement under this Schedule does not override any other kiw, ordinance.
bylaw or regulation, mi is subject [o any limitation or prohibition thereunder.


--- PAGE 78 ---

I 54
N(). 19182
GOVI iRNMENT  GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST [998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
Schedule 2
PROCEDURAL MATTERS REGARDING SERVITUDES
[Sections 127(4) and 129( 2)]
1. A person who intends to claim a servitude or an ammdment of a servitude under the
Act must give the owner of (he land which will be subje :t to the servitude written notice
of his or her claim.
2. Where a claimant is not the owner of the land in favour of which the servitude is
claimed, the claimant must give the owner written not ce of the claimant’s claim.
3. The notice must include details of at least the following, where relevant:
(<1)
(b)
(c)
((1)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(/)
the entitlement of the claimant to the use of he water;
a description of the land which will be subje :t to the servitude;
whether the servitude claimed is a personal ( Ir a praedial servitude:
in the case of a personal servitude, the name identity number or registration
number (if applicable) of the person in whose fwour  the servitude is claimed;
in the case of a praedial servitude, a descriptil m of the land in favour of which
the servitude is claimed;
the likely impact of the servitude on the lam or its use;
in the case of a servitude of aqueduct, the rou .e along which the water is to be
led over the land which will be subject to the servitude and other affected land;
in the case of a servitude of submersion, wher > the water will be stored and the
area that will be submerged;
the nature and locality of any proposed water\ tork, including any road or other
structure, which will reduce the loss and nconvenience to the owner or
occupier of the land which will be subject tr the servitude, as a result of the
servitude;
how and when maintenance of the proposed vaterwork is likely to be carried
out ;
the nature, quantity and situation of any materials required from the land
which will be subject to the servitude for t le purpose of constructing any
proposed waterwork;
the land reasonably required during the cons .ruction period for—
(i) construction camps;
(ii) accommodating people;
(iii) workshops; or
(iv) storage purposes;
(m) the extent and location of any land reasonably required for construction,
operating and maintaining a proposed water .vork on the land which will be
subject to the servitude; and
(n) the compensation offered.
4. A plan depicting the location of the proposed wa erworks on the land which will
be subject to the servitude must be attached to the notice.
5. When a person gives a notice of a claim for a ser Iitude or for an amendment of a
servitude, that person must also send, by registered po ;t, a copy of the notice tb
(a) the lessee of the land;
(b) the national, provincial or local governrrlent authority responsible for
controlling, maintaining or repairing a road a,xoss which the claimant intends
constructing a waterwork in terms of the ser )itude or amendment; and
(c) every person who. from a perusal of—
(i) the title deeds of the land;
(ii) the records of the Registrar of Mining I’itles;  or
(iii) the records of any other government otli ce which records prospecting or
mining rights,
appears to have any interest in the land whit ~ may be negatively afiected  by
the servitude, if the whereabouts of the pers( n can be readily ascertained.
(i. A notice under item I or 2 may be amended as a result of—


--- PAGE 79 ---

I 56
N(~. 19182
GOVI RNMENT  GAZEM’E. 26 AIJGUST  1998
Act No. M. 1998
NATIONAI. WATE t ACT. 199X
(~1~ the clairntint exercising his or her rights undt r section 128 of the Act: or
(h) objections to the notice by the owner olthe Iaird subject to the servitude or the
owner of the land in favour of which the serl itudc is claimed.
7. An arnemled notice must be dealt with in the sane way as the original notice
8. A claimant may, not earlier than 14 days and not la er than 90 days ufter the notices
required in terms of this Schedule have been given, apply to the High Court for the
award of a servitude claimed in terms of the procedure set out in this Schedule and the
High Court may make such order as it deems tit.
Schedule 3
POWERS WHICH MAY BE EXERCISED AND DI JTIES TO BE PERFORMED
BY CATCHMENT  MANAGEMENT AGENCYE  S ON ASSIGNMENT OR
DELEGATION
lSections 72.73 and 151( I (1)]
General
1. Subject to Chapter 2 and sections 72 and 73 of this Act a catchment  mantigernent
agency may exercise any of the powers or perform a.ly of the dllties set out in this
Schedule and any other powers or duties necessary I w desirable in order to ensure
compliance with the Act, to the extent that such power and duties have been assigned
or delegated to it, and within the constraints of the assignment or delegation.
Power to manage, monitor, conserve and protect wat:r resources and to implement
catchment management strategies
2. A catchment management agency may-
((1)
(b)
{c)
([i)
(e)
manage and monitor permitted water use wit lin its water management area;
conserve and protect the water resources and I esource quality within its water
management area;
subject to the provisions of the Act, develc p and operate a waterwork in
furtherance of its catchment management stri tegy:
do anything necessary to implement catchrner t management strategies within
its water management area; and
by notice to a person taking water. and all m htiving given that person a
reasonable opportunity to be heard, limit (t e taking of water in terms of
Schedule 1.
Catchment management agencies may make rules t J regulate water use
3. ( 1 ) A catchment management agency may make rtrles to regulate water use.
(2) The rules made under subitem ( 1 ) may relate, ar mngst other things, t[~—
((I) the times when;
(b) the places where;
(c) the manner in which; and
(LI) the waterwork through which,
water may be used.
(3) A water user must adhere to any such rules which apply to that user.
(4) A rule made under subitem ( 1 ) prevails over a c(mflicting distribution condition
contained in any authorisation.
(5) Before making rules a catchment management a ;ency must—
(a} publish a notice in the Gm.ette-
(i) setting out the proposed rules;
(ii) inviting written comments to be subr litted on the proposed rules,


--- PAGE 80 ---

[58
No. 19182
GOVE tNMENT  GAZE’tTE. 26 AUG[JST  1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
(b)
((’)
(d)
specifying an address to which and a date >efore which the comments are
to be submitted, which da[e may not ]e earlier than 60 days after
publication of the notice:
consider what further steps, if any, are appropr ate to bring the contents of the
notice to the attention of interested persons. : nd take those steps which the
catchment management agency considers to b t appropriate;
consider all comments received on or before ~ he date specified in paragraph
(a)(ii); and
consider all applicable conditions for provisio I of services and byltiws made
. .
under the Water Services Act, 1997 (Act No. 108 of 1997), by water services
institutions having jurisdiction in the area in c uestion.
(6) After complying with subitem (5), a catchment nianagernent agency mLlst-
(CZ) finalise the rules; and
(b) make it known, in an appropriate manner, !h: t the rules have been finalised
and where they may be read; or
(c) deliver or send a copy of the rules to each watt r user to whom the rules apply.
Catchment  management agencies may require es abolishment of management
systems
4. ( I ) A catchment management agency may require n writing that a water user—
(a) install a recording or monitoring device to monitor storing, abstraction and
use of water;
(b) establish links with any monitoring or managelnent system to monitor storing,
abstraction and use of water; and
(c) keep records on the storing, abstraction and use of’ water and submit the
records to the catchment management agency
(2) If the water user fails to comply with a requiren  ent of subitem ( 1 )(a) or (b), a
catchment management agency may undertake the instal Iatiorr or establishment of such
links and recover any reasonable cost from that water u ;er.
Catchment  management agencies may require alter: tions to waterworks
5. ( 1 ) A catchment  management agency may. by writtc n notice to the owner or person
in control of a waterwork, require that person to
:ollect and submit particular
information within a period specified to enable the catc hment management agency to
determine whether (bat waterwork is constructed, maintained and operated in
accordance with the Act.
(2) A catchment management agency may direct the )wner or person in control of a
waterwork  at the owner’s own cost and within a specifi :d period, to-
(a) undertake specific alterations to the waterwor:;
(b) install a specific device; or
(c) demolish, remove or alter the waterwork or re rider the waterwork inoperable
in a manner specitied in the directi\’e.
(3) A catchrnent  agency may only issue such a directl ve if it is reasonably necessary
in order tw-
(i) protect authorised uses of other persons:
(ii) facilitate monitoring and inspection of’ the wa er use; or
(iii ) protect public safety, property or the resource quality.
(4) If the owner fails to comply with a directive, the ( atchment management agency
may—
({~) undertake the alterations;
(h) install the device: or
(c) demolish, remove or alter the waterwork or re; tder the waterwork inoperable.
and recover any reasonable costs from the person to wh .m the directive was issued.


--- PAGE 81 ---

160
N(I. 19182
GOVE {NMENT GAZEITE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL. WATER ACT, 1998
Catchment management agencies may temporarily C( mtrol, limit or prohibit use of
wdter during periods of water shortage
6. ( I ) [t’ a catchment management agency on reascmab e grounds believes that a water
shortage exists or is about to occur within an area it may, lespite anything to the contrary
in any authorisation, by notice in the Gaze/re or by wril ten notice to each of the water
users in the area who are likely to be affected—
(i) limit or prohibit the use of water;
(ii) require any person to release stored water um er that person’s control;
(iii) prohibit the use of any waterwork; and
(iv) require specified water conservation measure: to be taken.
(2) A notice contemplated in subitem ( I ) must—
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3) In
must—
({1)
(/))
(c)
specify the geographical area or water resourx e to which the notice relates;
set out the reason for the notice; and
specify the date of commencement of the me< sures.
exercising the powers under subitem ( 1 ), the [ atchment management agency
give preference to the maintenance of the Re:erve:
treat all water users on a basis that is f’air and reasonable; and
consider—
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the actual extent of the water shortage;
the likely eflects of the shortage on the vater users;
the strategic importance of any wafer us< ; and
any water rationing or water use lirr itations bv a wuter services
institution having jurisdiction in the are ~ in question under the Waler
Services Act, 1997 (Act No. 108 of 1997).
(4) If the owner or person in control of a waterwo k contravenes a notice issued
under subitem ( I ), the catchment management agency r lay—
(a) modify, or require the owner of the waterww k to modify the waterwork  so
that it cannot be used to take more water than t ~at allowed for in the notice; or
(b) remove the waterwork or require the owner t ) remove the waterwork if the
notice contains a prohibition on the use of that waterwork.
(5) A catchment management agency may recover fern the owner uny reasonable
costs incurred by it in acting under subitem (4).


--- PAGE 82 ---

I (12
N(). 1<)[S2
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
Schedule 4
MANAGEMENT AND PI.ANNING  OF WATER MANAGEMENT
INST1TUTIONS
[Sections 79(2) and 82(4)]
Part 1: Governing board
Governing board
1. ( 1 ) The board-
((J) is responsible for
institution; and
the management of the afhirs  of’ the water management
(b) may exercise the powers of the institution.
(2) Without limiting subitem ( l), i! is the role of the board—
(a) to decide the strategies and policies to be followed by the institution; and
(b) to ensure that the institution exercises its powers or performs its duties in a
proper, efficient. economical and sustainable manner.
(3) The board must carry out its functions as efficiently as possible, consistent with
prudent commercial practice.
(4) in the absence of the chairperson, the deputy chairperson performs all the
functions of the chairperson.
Terms and conditions of appointment
2. ( 1 ) A board member holds office for a term—
([~) specified in the constitution, if the institution has a constitution; or
(b,) determined by the Minister, if the institution has no constitution.
(2) The institution may pay a board member from the revenues of the institution an
amount of remuneration, determined by the board from time to time, in accordance with
any directive from the Minister.
Chief executive officer
3. ( I ) The board may appoint a suitably qualified person as chief executive oflicer of
the institution.
(2) The chief executive officer of the institution holds oftice on the terms and
conditions determined by the board.
(3) The board may remove the chief executive oflicer of the institution from oflice,
(4) The Minister may, for’ good reasons and after consultation with the board, direct
the board to remove the chief executive ofiicer from ofke.
(5) The board mus[ comply with a directive given by the Minister under
subparagraph (4).
(6) The functions to be pet-formed by the chief executive otticer in terms of this
Schedule may also be performed by the chairperson or any other officer designated by
the chairperson.
(7) The board must, in consultation with the Minister of’ Public Service and
Administration, determine the sal~ry of its chief executive oflicer, subject to the
approval of the Minister.
Vacancies, resignations and removal from office
4. ( I ) The rmsition of a bourd member becomes vacant if the member-
i(l;
(1))
({)
(d)
(t’)
(t)
Iws been declared to be of unsound mind by a competent authority;
is declared insolvent;
resigns;
is convicted of any offence involving dishonesty;
is absent without prior consent of the chtiirperson from two consecutive
meetings of the bomt; or
fuils LO make any disclosure required to be made in terms of item 7.


--- PAGE 83 ---

10+
htl 1’) 182
GOV1;RNMUNT  GAZE’I-rF.,  2(I AI JG1!S’I- 199X
—
.\cl No. 36, 1’)98
NATloNA1.  WATER  ,4(””1.  19W
Validity of decisions
5. ( I ) An xx or dccisi(m of the hoard is no[ invalid merely bcc:iLIw {Jt––
(a) lL defect or irregulwity in, or in conncctifm with, the app~~intnlcn[ IJI’ LI b(mrd
mcmbel-: m
(l)) a vac:mcy in the membership (Ii’ the bwmt, including a vac:incy resulting I“r(lln
the I“uilure 1~~ appoint tin (Irigind b(wd member.
[2) Anything done by or in relation [O u person purporting [o wt AS chairperson ~~r :[s
a b(~wd member  is not intalid nwrely hecirusc—
((I ) the occmion for the person to irct had not arisen or had cewxi:
(b) there was a def’cct or irregularity in relation to the oppointmenl; or
(() the appointment had ceased to have eifect.
Part 2: Board members
Duties of board members
6.( I ) A board member must ;It idl (itnes act honestly in performing [he foncti(ms  (Jf’ his
<)r her olticc.
(2) A bored member nlLIst tit all times exercise a reasonable degree ot care find
diligence in pml’orming a member’s functions, :md in furthmmce of’ this duty withtw~
limiliog i[s scope, inLIst-
((() ttike reastm;]hlc steps tu inkmn hinrseli’ or herself shout the institution. ils
business :mci ilctivities :md the circumstances in which it operates;
(b) take reasonable steps, through the processes of the board, [o obtain sufficient
inf’ormti(irm and advice shout til I matters to be decided hy the hoard to cnuble
him or her (() nlak conscientious and informed decisions: and
(t) c.xercise CIIt uclivc  discretion  with respect to all miitters [() bc decided by the
bourd.
(3) A board mernhcr need not give ctmtinu(JLl\ ~mcnti(m 10 the affairs of’ the homl, but
is requirut 10 exercise reas(~[ldie diligcncc in relation to-
([/) the business of; and
( b )  prcpwati(m I’i)r und ;Illendwlct! at nlcetitlgs ol,
the boml  A any con~nlit[ce (o which the board nwmher is appoin[ed.
(4) In determining  the degree O( ctirc ~Iod diligence required to be exerciwt by a
hod member. regard must he had to the skills, knowledge or insight powcsscli  hy tila(
member. and tt) [he cicgrcc 01 risk involvc~i in any p:wticui:tr circulns[ilncts.
(5) A board member. or former ixmrci member, must INN muhe impmper LIW (~t his (w
her i)osition  :1s a metnbet- or (JI inf{nmw[ion  :wquircd  by virtue (~t his or hcr positi(m  its
u member m gain, dircctiy  or indirectly. an advanltlge  for ililnseif  ~~r i~~rseii’  or fOI” WIY
otiwr person, or [(~ prcju Liicc the institution.
(6) Tilis item mLIs[ be interpreted LIS wkiing to. mwt not cicviuting t’r~ml. any l:L\~
rciating In the criminul or cit’il iiabiii[y oi” a member ot’ a go\erning  b(xly ~)i’ a ctwp(n”:(te
txxiy. :md it does not prcvcn! My crimin:d (jr civil proceedings  being instilutc(i in respect
t~f such u ii:ibiiity.
I)isclosure of’ interest
7. ( i ) if 0 bo:it-d nwmhcr ims a direct or inciirec[ pecufliilry or other interest in imy
]]]:ltttl Ill ~hi~h  the illstiluti(m  i s  concerned,  whicil ~OU]L!  c(mllic[ Wi[h the pr(lpcr
pet-f(mnallce (Ji’ ilis (w iwr du[ics in rei:ition to thnt matter, he or she must disclose tiult
in(cmst :IS w)(m as prac’[icahie ufter [he reievunt I:ICIS cwrnc to ilis or her knowic(igc.


--- PAGE 84 ---

I 66
N() 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
(2) If’ the board member is present at a meeting of the board at which the matter is m
be considered, the board member must disclose the nature of his or her interest to the
meeting immedi~(eiy before the matter is considered.
(3) If” the hoard member is aware thtit the matter is to be considered at a meeting of
the bowl ot which he or sbe does not intend to be present, he or she must disclose tbe
nature ol his or her interest to the chairperson before the meeting is held.
(4) A board member who has made a disclosure under this pardgraph must not—
(L1 ) be present during any deliberation; or
(h) take part in any decision,
of the bowl in relation to the matter in question.
(5) Any disclosure made under this paragraph must be noted in the minutes of the
relevant meeting of the board.
Recovery of improper profits
8. [f a person contravenes item 7, the institution, or the Minister in the name of the
institution, may recover from the person as a debt due to the institution, through u
competent court, either or both of the following—
(a) if that person, or any other person, made a profit as a result of the
contravention, an amount equal to that profit; and
(b) if the institution has sufiered loss or damage m a result of the contravention,
an amount equal to that loss or damage.
Part 3: Proceedings of the board
Convening meetings
9. ( I ) The board must meet at least twice in each year.
(2) Meetings must be held at the times and, subject to subitem (4), the places
determined by the board.
(3) The chairperson may convene a meeting at any time and must do so when
requested by one third of the board members.
(4) The chairperson may, from time to time, determine that a meeting be held by
telephone, closed-circuit television or other means of communication.
Notices of meeting
10. ( 1 ) Except as provided in subitem (3), the chairperson or the chief executive
ofticer must give at least seven days’ written notice to board members of any meeting
convened at the request of one third of the board members.
(2) A notice given in terms of subitem ( 1 ) must—
(a) specify the date and time of the meeting; and
(b) state the general nature of the business of the meeting; and either
(L) state the place of the meeting; or
(d) specify the means of communication by which the meeting will be held.
(3) The chief executive officer or chairperson must give notice of a meeting—
(a) in writing; and
(b) not less than seven days in advance except in cases of emergency or where
every board member agrees to accept short notice.
(4) If notice of a meeting is given [he board must, if requested by a board member,
allow that member to participate in the meeting in the manner contemplated in item 16.
(5) The proceedings of, or resolutions passed at a meeting of, a board are not invalid
merely because—
(a) the chief executive officer omitted to send a notice [o a board member; or
(b) a member did not receive a notice of the meeting.


--- PAGE 85 ---

lox
N,). 191X2
(GOVERNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGLJSI  19CJX
id No. .36, 1998
NA’rloNAL WATER ACT, 1998
Quorum
11. ( I ) Nt) business nmy be conducted at a meeting unless a quorum of members is
present.
(~) A ‘lu{JrLllll  is ii “Ii)jority Of the  menlbers for the time being.
(3) if a quoi-LIn) is not present within 30 minutes after the time uppointed for a
nwcting, the person presiding at the meeting may itdjourn the meeting to the same time
and pitice. seven days utter the adjournment.
(4) It’ a quorum is not present at an adjourned meeting within 30 minutes aticr the
tinw :~ppoin(cd Ior the meeting, the meeting is automatically cancelled.
Adjournment
12. ( 1 ) The person presiding at a mee(ing at which a quorum is prcsent-
(~~) may adjoLlrn (he meeting with the meeting’s consent; wrd
(h) must adjourn the meeting if the meeting so directs.
(~) An ~djourlled ,llectillg II]US[ be held at the tin)e and place ;igreed to by the meeting
before it is adjourned.
(3) Only unfinished business of an initial meeting can be conducted at an adjourned
meeting.
Person presiding at meetings
13. ( I ) Subject to item 7(4)—
({/) the chairperson must preside at uII meetings of the bcmrcl at which the
cbairpers(m is present; and
(b) in the ubsence ol the chairperson. (he deputy chairperson must preside at a
meeting of the board.
(~) [( neither th~ ~halrp~rson  nor lh~ deputy chairperson is present, the meeting must
appoint a board member present at the meeting to preside.
Voting
14. ( I ) A question arising at a meeting must be determined by a majority of votes ol
board members present and voting.
(~) lf V[)ting oll a question is CqUZLl, the person presiding has a wsling  Vok aS welt X$
11 deliberative vote.
Minutes
15. ( 1 ) The chief executive oticer must ensure thut complete and ticcurtite minutes ot’
each meeting tire kept.
(2) [X:lf’[ nlinLltes of each meeting nlust-
((L) be prcscn(ed to the next meeting of[he board for amendment, if necessmy, and
ildoption: and
(b) be entered in a durable, bound volume of minutes.
(3) The person presiding at the next meeting must sign and date an affirmation to the
ellect thut imy minutm ot’ [he previoL]s meeting have been adopled  by the meeting.
l’anticipation in meetings
16. ( 1 ) The bowd ITMy, by resolution, permit board members to participate in a
particular meeting by [elephone, closed-circuit television or olher means of conln]LlI~i-
cution.
(2) A board member  who participates in a meeting und~r permission given under
suhitcm ( [ ) must he rcgurded  as being present at the meeting.


--- PAGE 86 ---

17(1
N(,, 19182
GOVf I/NMEN’r GAZETTE 2fJ AUGL{ST 1998
Act No. M. 199X
NATIONA1. WATE / ACT, 1998
Resolutions without meetings
17. ( 1 ) 1[ all the board members for the time being ({ther than a board member who
is absent from South Africa at the time) sign a document containing a statement that they
are in fi~vour of a resolution set out in the document, a resolution in those terms shall be
taken to have been passed at a meeting of the board held on the day on which the
document is signed or, if’ the members do not sign it ( n the same day, on the day on
which the last member signs the document.
(2) For the purpose of subitem ( 1), two or more sc parate documents containing a
statement in identical terms, each of which is signed b y one or more board members,
must be taken to he one document,
(3) A document referred to in this item may be in the form of a telex or facsimile.
Execution of documents
18. ( 1 ) Subject to subitem (2). a document is duly executed by the board if it is
executed on behalf of the board by any two board men hers.
(2) The board may, either generally or in a partic[llar case or class of cases, by
resolution authorise the chief executive otlicer to exec.lte documents on behalf of the
board.
Appointment of committees
19. ( I ) The board may, from time to time-
(a) appoint such temporary or standing cornmittt es as it sees fit from among its
members;
(h) appoint persons other than board members to a committee;
(c) remove any person appointed to a committee from such committee; and
(d) determine the terms of reference of any corer littee,
which may include—
(i) full decision making powers on particular matters; or
(ii) a requirement to refer decisions back to the b ~ard for ratification.
(2) Items 7.11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18(1) and 20 appl) to a committee as if it were the
board.
(3) Part 2 also applies to any member of a committe;  who is not a board member.
(4) A committee must report to the board at the time, and in the manner determined
by the board.
Power to regulate proceedings
20. Subject to this Part, the board may regulate its o\ m proceedings.
Part 4: institutional pkznna  ng
Business plans
21. ( I ) The board must prepare business plans.
(2) The first business plan must be for a period of no less than three years and must
begin when the first financial year starts, which must be not more than six months after
the board is established.
(3) Each subsequent business plan must be updated mnually.
(4) The board may review and revise a business PI: n at any time, and must do so
when so directed by the Minister.
General matters to be included in business plans
22. Each business plan must be in the form determined by the Minister and—
(o) must set out the objectives of the institution:
(b) must outline the overall strategies and policies that the institution is to follow
to achieve the objectives;


--- PAGE 87 ---

17?
N(I 19 I X2
GOV: IRNMENT GAZE, ”I”t_ti ?6 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, [99X
NATIONA[. W’AT’E / ACT. 1998
(() must include a slatcment of’ the services v hich the institution expects to
provide and the standards expected to be achi~ ved in providing tbosc services;
(d) must include the financial and performance i ldicators and targets considered
by the board [o be appropriate;
(c) may include any other information which the mard considers appropriate; and
(/) must include any other information delermin:d  by the Minister.
Financial matters to be included in business plans
23. Eiich business plaII—
((1)
(h)
((”)
((l)
((’)
(f)
must include a financial target:
must outline the overall financiill strategies ‘“or the institution
setting of’ charges, borrowing. investment and purchasing
strategies:
inclading the
and disposal
.
mLIst include a lorecasl of” (he revenue and expenditure of’ the inslitu(ion.
including a Iorecast  of ’~iipitiil  expcncfiture aIId borrowings;
must provide lot” capacity building amongst ts board menlhers and of]icials:
m~y include iiny other financial in formati m which the boiud considers
appropriitte: and
must include any other finitncial information determined by the Minister.
Matters to be considered in setting financial targets
24. [n preparing or revising a financial target. Ik fwmf must have regard t(l—
({/) the need to nlilin(ain [be institution’s financi:l viability;
(b) the need to maintain a reas(mablc ICVCI of’ rese “ves, especially to provide f’or—
(i) corrective action to redress the resuits oi past ra~iill and gender
discrimination in the use of witter resouces;
( ii) any estimi]ted t’uture demand for the ser~ices of’ the institution: and
( iii) any need to improve the accessibility ot. and performance st~ndarcfs for.
the services provided by the institution; and
(c) other matters determined by the Minister.
Business plans to be given to Minister
25. ( I ) When the hoard prepares or revises a business plan. it must immediately make
a copy oti the pliln i[v:iilitble  to tbe Minister.
(2) The Minister m:ly -
([1) within 60 days after receiving a copy of’ a prpitred  plan: or
(h) within 30 days atlcr receiving a copy of’ a re’ ised plan.
make comnwnts  on the plan to the board.
(3) The board must consult in good ti~ith with the Mi lister following communication
to it of the Ministcl-is  commenls  and must make any clxinges to tbe plan that are agreuf
upon by the Minister and the board.
(4) The Minister miiy, from time to time, direct the b xmf to include in. or omit from,
a business plan, any matter, including a financial matter.
(5) Bclore giving a directive under this item, the vtinister must consult wi[h the
boiud  as to the matters to be included in the directive.
(6) The board must comply with a directive given Lmler this item.
Board to notify Minister of significant events
26. If matters arise that ]might prevent. or rnaterii [[y afiect. achievement of_ the
objectives of the institution in terms of’ the business pl: n or financiid  targets contilined
in the business plan, the board must immediately notify the Minister of the existence of
sLIch matters.


--- PAGE 88 ---

I 74
N,). 191 X2
Gf3V ,3 RN M13NT GAZETTE,  26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
Institution must act in accordance with business pl m
27. The institution must act only in accordance with i s business plan, as it exists from
titne to time, unless the Minister has directed otherwis ?.
Minister may require information
28. ( I ) The Minister may direct the board to give hin or her specific information.
(2) The board must comply with such directive.
Part 5: Monitoring and intervention
Provision of information by an institution
29. ( I ) An institution must provide the Minister or any person authorised by the
Minister with—
(a) the information which tbe Minister requir :s on the afTzairs and financial
position of the institution; and
(b) access to such books, accounts, documents aid assets of the institution as the
Minister may require.
(2) The Minister may appoint a person to investigate ~ the affairs or financial position
of an institution and recover the reasonable fees and di ;bursements of that person from
that institution.
(3) A board member and an employee of a board h Ive the same duties towards the
Minister or a person authorised by the Minister as a[ institution has in subitem ( I),
except to the extent that the board member or employee can show that he or she is unable
to comply.
Taking possession of books, records and assets
30. The Minister or a person authorised by the Mini;ter may enter into the premises
of any institution and take possession of any book, record or asset of the institution
where this is necessary in order to obtain any inforn Iation to which the Minister is
entitled in terms of this Part or for the purposes of any nvestigation  that the Minister is
entitled to conduct in terms of this Part.
Offence
31. Any institution. board member or employee of I he board who does not comply
with items 28 to 30 or obstructs a person appointed L rider item 29(2) is guilty of an
offence and liable on conviction to a sentence contem~ Iated in section 151 of the Act.
Part 6: Records and repor fng
Financial records and accountability
32. (I) The financial year of an institution is for a 12- nonth period determined by the
hoard.
(2) The board must ensure that the chief executive c fficer of the institution keeps—
(a) proper records and accounts of the activities, transactions and affairs of the
institution and of the board; and
(b) any other records or accounts that are nece:sary to explain sufficiently the
financial operations and tinancial position of the institution.
(3) The board and the chief executive officer of the ir stitution must each do all things
necessary to—
((J ) ensure that all money payable to the institutil m is properly collected:
(/}) ensure that all money spent by the institution is properly spent and properly
authorised:


--- PAGE 89 ---

I 76
N(). 1’)182
(; OVFRNMENT GAZETI%,26AUGLJST  19[)8
Act No. M. 1998
NATIONAL. WATEW.  ACT. 199X
((”)
(,/]
([’)
(i)
(,s)
ensure that there is adequate control overall [.ssets acquired for the purposes
{Jf[he institution, or managed orcontrolled  b{ it;
ensure thti[ all liabilities incurred cm behalf’ of the institution are properly
authorised:
ensure efficiency and economy of operations and avoidance of wtiste and
extravagance;
developand  maintain anacfequate
develop and maintain an adequate
budgeting and accounting system; and
financial c!mtrol system.
Annual report
33. ( i ) An institution mmt. in respect (If each financii:l year, prepare an annuiil report
containing-
(a) a report of’ its operiltions during the financial year:
(b) fillilllCiiIl  statements for the financial year; MI f
(() il copy of’ each directive given to it during th: t year by the Minister.
(2) The instituti(m mus[ submit the report to the Mi tister not litter thilt) six months
after the end of the financial year in question.
(3) The report of operations ret’erred to in subitem ( I )(a) must be prepared in a form
amf contain information determined by the Minister.
(4) Tlw fina[l~iill statements rclcrred to in subitem ( I )(/J) must be consistent with
generally accepted accounting practices and must C( ntain the information and be
prepared in the manner and for-m determined by the Minister.
(5) Such financial statenwn(s must-
([I) fairly present the results of the financial trans wtions of the institution during
the financial year to which they reli]tc ilnti the financial position of’ the
institution ils at the end of the year: and
(h) he aucfi(ed hy a chartered ~i~~oul)til[lt appoint(d by the board.
(6) The imstituti(m must puhfish its annual rcp(wt aI d make copies available at the
{)f’ficcs of the instituti(m f’or inspection and purchase by the public,
(7) The institution must-
([I) if it is a catchrnent management agency. table its annual report in Parliament:
or
(b) if it is a water user iissociatk)n, send a LX)py [f i[s annual report to the Secretary
to Parliament.


--- PAGE 90 ---

I 78
N(). 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGIIST 1998
Ad No. 36, 199t+
NA’I’IONAI. WATER ACT, 1998
Schedule 5
MODEL CONSTITUTION OF WAI’ER USER ASSOCIATION
lSedions 91( 1 )(~), 93(I) and 94(2)1
Name of Association
1. The nam of Ik Association is [specify the name] (hereinatier  referred to as “’the
Associ[iti(m”),
Application of the National Water Act of 1998 to the constitution
2. This constitution is subject to Chapter 8 of the National Water Act ol 1998
(hereatim relcrred to w the Act) and Schedule 4 to the Act.
objects of the Association
3. The objects of the Association are— [briefly describe the objects]
Principal functions of the Association
4. The principal functions to be performed by the Association in its areti of operation
ttre—
[Note: The following are options. Others may be proposed. Choose and number
your options.]
To ~;revent water from any water resource being wasted.
To protect wtiler resources.
To prevent any unlawful water use.
T() remove or arrange to remove any obstruction unl~lwfully  placed in a
wtitercourse.
To prevent any unlawful act likely to reduce the quality of wtiter in my water
resource.
To exercise genertil supervision over water resources.
To regulate the How of any watercourse by—
—
cleating its channel;
—
reducing the risk of dumage to the land in the event of Hoods;
.
chunging a watercourse back to its previous c~wrse where it has been
altered through natur.d ctiuses.
To investigate and record-
—
the quantity ot’ wtiter at ditferent levels of How in a wtitercourse:
—
the times when; and
—
the places where water may be used by any person entitled to use w:iter
from a wdler resource,
To conslruct, purchase or otherwise ticquire. control, operate :Iod mtiiotain
wtiterworks considered to be necessary for-
—  drtiiniog land: and
supplying water 10 Itmd for irrigation or other purpmscs,
To supcrviw ancl regul:ite the distribution Jnd use of wtiter from a water
resource according to the relevant water USC entitlements, by erecting d
mtiintainin,g devices liJr—
—
measuring ~nd dividing; (Jr
—
c(m[rolling  the diversion ot’ the How of wtiter.
Ancillary functions of Associations
5. ( I ) ‘lhe Assocititi(m  nMy pcrl’brn] functions other than its principal functions only
it’ it is not likely—
((I) to limit the Associ:ition’s copaci[y to perform its principal functions; and
(b) tt) be to the tin:uwial prejudice of itself or its members.


--- PAGE 91 ---

I 80
N,). 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZEITE,  26 A[JGUST  1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
(2) Other functions of the Association may include—
[Note: The following are options. Others may be proposed. Choose and number
your options.]
* Providing management services, tmining and other support services to-
(u) water services institutions; and
(b) rural communities.
* Providing catchment management services to or on behalf of responsible
authorities.
Founding members
6.( I ) The founding members of the Association are the members whose names appear
in Annexure  1 of this constitution and wbo have been authorised by the proposed
participants to act on their behalf in establishing the Association.
(2) The founding nlembers will, for purposes of arranging the first deCtlOn Of
members of the Management Committee, be considered to be the Management
Committee of the Association with powers and duties limited to arranging the election
in accordance with this constitution.
Membership of the Association
7. ( 1 ) The first members of the Association are the persons who, during the
consultation process, indicated their willingness to become members of the Association
and whose names appear in Annexure 2 of this constitution.
(2) Application for new membership of the Association must be addressed to the
Management Committee which must, at a meeting of the Committee, consider an
application and approve it unless there is good reason to refuse it.
(3) An association must allow a person to become a member of the Association if
directed by the Minister to do so.
(4) A member may only resign as a member of the Association with the approval of
the Management Committee, which may not unreasonably withhold its approval. [Note:
A reason for not accepting a resignation would be, for example, if the resignation
would detrimentally affect the Association’s ability to meet its financial commit-
ments in respect of infrastructure provided to serve the member concerned.]
Register of members
8. All members must communicate their addresses from time to time to the person
acting as secretary of the Association, who must keep a register of the names of
members and of their addresses.
Rights of members
9. ( 1 ) Membership of the Association does not give any member a right to any ot’ the
moneys, property or assets of the Association, but only gives members the privileges of
membership, subject to such charges and reasonable restrictions as are imposed by the
Management Committee from time to time.
(~) A member whose application for membership has been approved is bound by the
constitution and rules of the Association which are then in force or as they are
subsequently amended.
Liability of members
10. The liability of members is limited to the amount of unpaid charges and interest
thereon owing by them to the Association.
Qualification of candidates for membership of Management Committee
11. Any member of the Association is, subject to disqualifications contemplated in
Schedule 4 to the Act, eligible for election as a member of the Management Committee.
If the Association’s area of operation is divided into sub-areas, a member will only be


--- PAGE 92 ---

1s2
N{) 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZHTE.  26 AUGUST 19’)8
,Acl No. M), 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
eligible for election as a mernher of the Management Committee for’ the sub-area in
which tha[ member  resides.
Nomination of’ and voting for members of Management Committee
12. Any person whose mrme is on the voters list of the Association may norniniile
candida[m  for election as members of the Mamrgernent  Committee and may vote at an
election of members of the Committee. A person whose name appears on a voters list
prepared fur a sub-area of” the Association’s area of’ operation, will be entitled to
nominate candidates and to vote only in elections for that sub-areu.
Membership of Management Committee
[Note: The following are options. Others may be proposed. Choose and number
your options.]
13. ( I ) Option (a) The Management Committee of the Association will consist of
[specify the number] members,
Option (b) [Note: This option is additional to option (a) and applies where the area
of operation of the Association is divided into sub-areas.] The area of’ operation of the
Association will be divided into sub-areas as described in Annexure 3 to this
constitution, Each area will be represented on the Management Committee on the basis
set out in that Annexure.
(2) Membership of the Management Commit[ee  will be determined by an election
process in which till members whose names arc on the Association’s voters list may
participate.
(3) Option (a) Members will, subject to the disqualifications contemplated in
Schedule 4, be elected for a fixed term of [specify period] years.
Option (b) [Applies to election process only] Members will, subject to the
disqualifications contemplated in Schedule 4, be elected for a fixed term of [specify
period] years. The first election will take place as follows-
(i) one-third of the members elected who stand highest on (he poll will hold oflice
for a period of [specify period] years;
(ii) one-third of the members elected who stand next highest on the poll will hold
office fur a period of [specify period] years; and
(iii) the remaining members elected will hold otlice for a period of’ [specify
period] years.
If, in any case—
(a} no poll is required bectiuse the nominations received were not gretiter [him the
number of members to be clectecf; or
(b) two or more candidates h:ive received an equal number of votes,
the respective periods of’ office of the members will be determined by lot under
supervision of the returning officer.
(4) If a vacancy occurs on the Management Commi[tw, the vacancy must be filled
according to this item, provided thtit the member must be elected for a peri(xl equal to
the rem:iinder of the period for which the member who has vacated the office would
otherwise have continued in oflicc.
(5) At least 30 days’ notice of an election must be given lo all members of’ the
Association.
Appointment of chairperson and deputy chairperson
[Note: The following are options. Others may be proposed. Choose and number
your options.]
14. ( I ) option (a) After the election of the Management Committee tbe members of


--- PAGE 93 ---

I M
N{). 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZE’I”IE  26 AUGUST 1998
Ad No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, I Hi
that Committee must elect ti chairperson and deputy chairperson ofthe  Association from
amongst their nwmbers. The Management Committee may appoint any person to chair
the proceedings for (hat purpose.
option (b)
( 1 ) Aficr the election of the Mantigement Committee the members of the Associati[m
must elect u chairperson und u deputy chairperson of the Association from amongst the
elected members of the Management Committee. The members of the Association m:iy
appoin[ any person to chair the proceedings for thirt purpose.
(2) The chairperson and deputy chairperson hold office for a period of’ 12 months
from the date of their election and may be re-elected.
(3) When the period 01 oflice of’ a chairperson or deputy chairperson expires, thtit
person will, provided that he or she remains a member of the Association, remain in
ottice until the next meeting O( the Management Committee.
(4) A new chairperson and deput y chairperson of the Management Committee will be
elected annually. Should any of these ofiices be vacated before the term expires, the
office must be tilled immediately according (o the procedure set out in this item.
Voter’s list
15. ( 1 ) The founding members of the Association must select a person to prepare a
voters list for the tirst election of members of the Management Committee. The voters’
list must show—
(a) the names of all members included in Annexure 2 to this constitution and,
where appropriate, the name of a member’s uncredited representative;
(b) piirticukrrs  of each member’s entitlement to wtiter use; and
(c) the number of’ votes a member is entitled to.
(2) If the Association’s area of operation is divided into sub-areas, the voters’ list
must also be divided into subareas and the particulars referred to in subitem ( I ) must be
shown under the respective subareas.
(3) The number of vo[es will be determined on the following basis—
[Note: The following are options. Others may be proposed. Choose and number
your options.]
Option (a)
(lne vote per entitlement to water use.
Option (b)
A pro-rota number of’ votes in proportion to the quantity of water authorised under a
particular entitlement, compirred  to the total quantity of water under all o!’ the
entitlements registered with the Association. In this calculation all fractions must be
rounded oft’ to the next higher figure.
Option (c)
A pro-rata number of votes in proportion to the quantity of water authorised under a
particular entitlement, compared to the tottil qwmtity of water under all the entitlements
registered with the Association. In this calculation-
(i) all fractions must be rounded off to the next higher figure; and
(ii) no member will be awarded more than 10 votes.
Option (d)
One vote for every tive hectares or part of five hectares of land that can be irrigated in
terms of a member’s entitlement.
Option (e)
one vote for every iive hectares or part of five hectares of land that can be irrigated in
terms of a member’s entitlement, provided that no member will be awarded more than
1 () voles,
(4) If the entitlement to use water is not in the mtme of a natural person, the holder
must nominate an occreditcd representative whose name must appear on the voters’ I ist
and who may exercise the vote.
(5) If’ the entitlement is in the name of two or more persot;s they must designate one
of’ their numbers to represent them and that person’s name must appear on [he voters” list
and he or she may exercise the vote.
(6) The voters’ list must annually be revised by the Management Committee and also
whenever there is an amendment to the Association’s area of operation.


--- PAGE 94 ---

I X(l
N(). 19[X2
(;C)VE <NMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NAT1ONA1. WATH ACT. 1998
Appointment of employees
[Note: The appointment of a Chief Executive Officer for the Association is dealt
with in Schedule 4 to the Act. ]
16. ( I ) The Management Committee may employ such persons us it considers
necessary to perform the Association’s functions under this constitution.
(2) The appointment of employees or any change in their conditions of’ service must
be approved by resolution of’ the Management Committee.
(3) All employees of the Associutiun will remain in ~ lflice despite any change in the
composition and membership of the Management Com nittee.
Raising of loans
17. ( I ) The Management Committee may raise by way of’ loans. including bank
overdrafts, any funds required by it for the purpose of” c.lrrying out any of’ its functions
under this constitution or the Act.
(2) Whenever the Management Committee propose; to raise a loan. it must give
notice in writing of’ its intention, setting out details of’ the proposal. The notice must be
given to every member of’ the Association not less than 21 days before the date ot the
meeting of’ the Committee at which the proposal will be considered.
(3) No loan may be raised without a resolution o the Management  Cotnmittee
passed at a meeting at which not less that two-thirds of he members 01 the Committee
are present.
Charges and the recovery of charges
18. ( I ) For the purpose ofdefraying any expenditure tk at the Management Cmmmittee
has lawfully incurred or may lawfully incur in carrying out its functions and duties it
may tinnually tissess charges on members according to tbe pricing strategy f’or water use
set by the Minister.
(2) The Management Committee may recover the ch lrges assessed from either—
((~) the owners of the land concerned; or
(b) any person to whom water is supplied on the and.
(3) Whenever the Management Committee has assessed a charge, the Committee
must prepare an assessment roll setting forth-
(a) the name of each member liable to pay charg~s;
(b) a description of the piece of land, which may b: a specially delineated area, in
respect of which the charge is assessed;
(c) the quantity of water or abstraction time period to which the member is
entitled;
(d) the amount of the charge assessed;
(e) the date or dates on which payment is due am the amount due on each date;
and
(H the rate of interest payable on non-payment ar d the effective date of interest.
(4) A copy of the assessment roll must lie open for inspection in the otfice of the
Association at all reasonable times by any member of tl e Association.
Annual Report
[Note: The following are options. Others may be pr )posed. Choose and number
your options.]
Option (a)
19. The procedure as set out in Schedule 4 to the Act applies.
[Note: This option is only recommended for use b.~ well-established irrigation
boards with a large membership and which are transformed into water user
associations after promulgation of the Act.]
Option (b)
The Management Committee must. within three i nonths after the end of the
Association’s financial year, convene a general meetinf of’ members and must at the
meeting—
(i) table an audited financial statement of the l.ssociation’s accounts for the
preceding financial year, including full particulars of any remuneration paid
by the Association to members of the Managen ent Committee and employees
of the Association; and


--- PAGE 95 ---

188
No 191X2
G(3VI IRNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998 
NATIONAL WATE7  ACT, 1998
(ii) give an account to the members of its activit es during the year,
Winding up
[Note: The following are options. Others may be proposed. Choose and number
your options.]
Option (a)
20. ( 1 ) The Association may be dissolved by a resollltion passed at a special general
meeting held for that purpose, provided that—
(i) the resolution is passed by a majority of (w( -thirds of the members present
and entitled to vote at the meeting; and
(ii) the resolution is confirmed at a further specill general meeting held not less
than four weeks after the preceding special general meeting by a majority vote
of’ members entitled to vote thereon.
(2) A meeting passing a resolution referred to in subitem ( l)(i) of this constitution
may also pass resolutions by a majority vote fo-
((/) the appointment of a liquidator; and
(b) the disposal of surplus funds and assets of tle Association after winding up
and after the payment of all debts and obli.gati ms of the Association. provided
that any surplus assets may only be transferred to an Association or institution
with objects similar to those of the Associati(m. or to the Minister.
Option (b)
The aff’airs of the Association will be wound up by a person appointed by the Minister
in accordance with any directives given by the Minister, and subject to section 97 of the
Act.
LIST OF FOUNDING MEMBERS
ANNEXURE 1
(In alphabetical order)
LIST OF MEMBERS
ANNEXURE 2
(In alphabetical order)
DESCRIPTION OF SUB-AREAS AND REPRESENTATION IN MANAGE-
MENT COMMITTEE
ANNEXURE 3


--- PAGE 96 ---

190
N,) 1° I X2
G(3V ;RNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGIIST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT. 1998
Schedule 6
WAI%R TRIBUNAL
[Section 148(4)]
Part I: Water Tribunal me)nbet-s
Terms of office of members
1. ( I ) A member of’ the Walter Tribunal is appointed bra period of’ office determined
by the Minister, which may not exceed four years.
(2) A member may be re-appointed.
Disqualification of members
2. No person may hold oflice as a member of the W lter Tribunal-
(a) if that person is an unrehabilitated insolvent or
(b) if that person has heen convicted of any offence involving dishonesty or has
been sentenced to imprisonment without the option of a fine. A disqualifica-
tion under this subitem ends three years afte. the sentence has been served.
Nominations for appointment to Water Tribunal
3. ( 1 ) Whenever necessary, the Minister must request the Judicial Service
Commission to—
(a) publish a notice in the Grzerfe calling for no]ninations for appointment to the
Water Tribunal; and
(b) consider what further steps, if any, are apprxq lriate to bring the contents of the
notice to the uttention of interested persons, and take those steps which the
Commission considers to be appropritite.
(2) A notice in terms of subitem ( 1 ) mmst set out, i] general terms. at least—
(a) the activities of the Tribunal;
(b) the time commitments reasonably expected “rem members of the Tribunal;
(c) the term of ottice for which appointments w 11 be considered;
(d) the criteria for disqualifictition as a member-;
(e) the requirements with which a nomination must comply;
(f) the date by which nominations must be subrlitted, which may not be earlier
than 30 days after publication of the notice; md
(g) the address to which nominations must be S( nt.
(s) Every nomination of a person for appointment t{) the Tribunal must be signed by
a proposer and a seconder, neither of whom may be th: nominee, and must contain the
nominee’s signed acceptance.
(4) The Judicial Service Commission-
(a) must consider all valid nominations received before the date contemplated in
subitem (2)(f);
(/2) may prepare a short list of nominees:
({) may interview all short-listed nominees: and
(A) must make recommendations to the Minister on the appointment of members
of the Tribunal.
(5) In recommending a nominee for’ appointment the Judicial Service Cornrnission
must consider-
(a) the criteria set out in section 146(4) of the Act;
(h) the reputation and integrity of the nominee: md
(() any conflict of’ interests which the nominee ] nay have.
(6) The Judicial Service Commission must recomm md a candidate for appointment
for every vacancy, including that of chairperson or depu [y chairperson. where necessary.


--- PAGE 97 ---

[ ~~
N(, 19182
(iOVt? 7NMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGIJST  1998
Act N(). M, IYM
N/\lloNAI. WATE~ ACT. 1998
(7) The Department inusl pay all costs-
([/) rekrting to the publication of’ notices in terms of suhitcm ( I): and
(b) incurred by the Judicial Service Commission in the perf[mnwrce of its task.
Termination of office of members
4. ( I ) A member of the Water Tribunal ceases to hold office—
([/) from the etyective date of’ the member’s resignation;
(b) if the member is uhsent without leave f’:wm the chairperson on two
consecutive sittings of’ the Tribunal at which the member’s presence is
required. Leave ]may be gmnted retrospectively if the absence of the member
wm due to unforeseen circumstances:
(c} if the member has become disqualified in terl M of item 2;
(d) if the member hiis been declared to be of I nsound mind by a competent
authority; or
(c) if the member’s appointment hzs been terminated in terms of section 146 of
the Act.
(2) A member who is not the chairperson must notify the chairperson of his or her
resignation. The chairperson must notify the Minister oi his or her own resignation and
the resignation of any other member.
Part 2: Lodging and hearing of appeals md applications
Lodging of appeals and applications
5. ( I ) An appeal to the Water Tribunal under sectiori 148( I ) and an application for
determination of compensation must be commenced by serving a copy of a written
notice of appeal or application on the relevant responsible authority or catchment
management agency and lodging the original with the ‘“’ribunal.
(2) The Tribunal may, for good reason. condone th: late lodging of an appeal or
application.
(3) A responsible authority or a catchment mana},ernent agency against whose
decision or offer an appeal or application is lodged must within a reasonable time—
(a) send to the Tribunal all documents relating t) the matter, together with the
reasons for its decision; and
(b) allow the appellant or applicant and every party opposing the appeal or
application to tnake copies of the documents .md reasons.
Hearing of appeals or applications by Water Tribun,d
6. ( I ) An appeal or application before the Water Tri renal must be heard by one or
more members, as the chairperson may determine.
(2) A party to an appeal m application maybe represented by a person of that party’s
choice.
(3) Appeals and applications to the Tribunal take the form of a rehearing. The
Tribunal may receive evidence, and must give the appell mt or applicant and every party
opposing the appeal or application an opportunity to pr :sent their case.
(4) The Tribunal must keep minutes containing a slmmary  of the proceedings of
every hearing.
Subpoenas and evidence
7. ( 1 ) The Water Tribunal may—
(a) subpoena for questioning any person who m ~y be able to give information
relevant to the issues; and
(b) subpoena any person who is believed to hav~ possession or control of any
book, document or object relevant to the issue;, to appear before the Tribunal
and to produce that book, document or object.
(2) A subpoena must be signed by a Tribunal memb jr and must—
(a) specifically require the person named in it to ~ppear before the Tribunal;
(/7) state the date, time and place at which the pel son must appear; and
(() sufficiently identify any book, document or object to be produced by that
person.
(3) The law relating to privilege, as it applies to i witness subpoenaed to give


--- PAGE 98 ---

I y~
N,). 191 X2
(GOVERNMENT GAZETTE. 26 AUGUST 1998
,icl N{). 36, 1998
NATIONAL. W.JW’ER  ACT, 199X
evidence or [o produce any book, document or object before a court of’ law, applies to the
qucs(ioning of’ my person and (o [he production of’ any book, document  or object in
lerms of this item.
(4) The party at whose request a subpoena was issued must pay witness fees, travel
and subsistence allowances to u person subpoen~ied 10 appear before the Tribunal, M the
applicable High Court scale.
(5) The Tribunal mtiy administer an
ct]lled or subpoenaed to give evidence.
Contempt of’ the Water Tribunal
oath or uccept an a!lirmation from any person
8. ( 1 ) A person commits contempt of the Water Tribuna-
((1)
(b)
(c)
(d)
((?)
u)
(g)
if, after having been subpoenaed to appetir before the Tribunal, the person
without good ctiuse does not uttend;
if the person, without good cause, fails to produce any book, document or
object specified in u subpoena;
if, after having appeared in response to a subpoena, the person l~ils to remain
in attendance until excused by tbe Tribunal;
by refusing to take the oath or to make an ollirrntition  as a witness when the
Tribunal so requires;
by refusing to answer wry question fully and to the best of that person’s
knowledge and belief, but subject to item 7(3);
if during the proceedings, the person behaves improperly; or
if the person prejudices or improperly influences the proceedings of the
Tribunal.
(2) The Water Tribunal retry refer any contempt to a High Court. A High Court may
make an appropriate order.
Decisions of the Water Tribunal
9. ( I ) The Water Tribunal must give its decision in writing. A majority decision of
members hearing a matter (if the matter is heard by more than two members) constitutes
a decision of the Tribunal.
(2) The Tribunal must, at the request of any party and within a reasonable time, give
written reasons for its decision on any matter.


--- PAGE 99 ---

I oh
N(I 19182
GOVERNMENT GAZETfE,  26 AUGUST 1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
Schedule 7
ACTS REPEALED
[Section 163( l)]
Number and year of Act
Short title
Extent of repeal
I
Ac( No. 32 uf 1914
Har[ehee}tpocnt  Irrigation Scheme (Crucodlle River)
The whole
Act. 1914
Act No 40 of 1916
Mupnchs Grunden Water and Commmuige Act, 1916
The whole
Act N(I. 2.301 191X
Ilartebeestpoort  lrmgatinn  Scheme (Acquisition of
The wh~)lc
land)  ,4c1, 1918
Act N,). II of 1919
Ripm-ian  Lund (Erven imd Commnmtges)  Ac[. 1919
The whole
Act No. 13 of 191°
The Bcxlfbrd Ackfi(iomrl  Wttfer Supply (Private) Act.
The whole
loll)
Act Nt). 14[)f 1919
R;md Mines P{~wer Supply Compmry  Wuter Supply
The whole
(Priv~[e)  Act. 1919
Act No. 24 of” 1921
Drsrhml Wittcrw,wks  Consnlidti[ion (Priva!e) Act, 192 I
The whole
Act N{,. 14 of 1923
Maptwh. (hnnden Water m)cl f70nmmnagc  Act Amend-
The whole
mcn[ Act. 1923
Act No, 14 Ot’ 1925
Etrenc/cr  (Vim Rhynsdorp) Exchange (11 Lmsd Act, 1925
The whole
Ac( No. 15 (>! 1925
Sundays River Settlements Acfminist!-a[iorr  Ac(, 1925
The whole
Ac( N[). 4 of 1926
Br;mdvlci  Land and irrigation Worhs Act, 1926
The whole
Act No. If) of 1926
Winterton lrrigatifm Settlement ( Local Board of Man-
The whole
isgementj  Act. 1926
Act No. 15 nf 1929
Pre[t)ria Wfi[erworhs (Private) Act, 19’29
The whole
Act No. 18 of 19?9
Rwrd Mines Power Supply Cumpwry Addi(iomd Water
The whole
Supply (Private) Act, 1929
Act No. 2 I of 1929
Irrigation Loans Adjustment Act, 1929
The whole
Act No, 41 of 1930
[rrigation Districts Adjustment Act. 1930
The whole
Act No. 10 of 1932
Marico-BosvehJ  Irrigation Scheme Act, 1932
The whole
Ac[ No. 13 of 1932
Mafeking W~terworks (Private) ACI, 1932
The whnle
Act No. 20 of 1933
Frimschoek  Water (Priv~te) Act, 1933
The whole
Act No. I I nf t934
Irrigati(m  Districts Adjustment (Amendment) Act, 1934
The whole
Act No. 38 of 1934
Vaal River Dc!veloprnent Scheme Act, 1934
The whole
Act No. 38 of 1935
Kopjes  Irrigation Settlement Act, 1935
The whole
Act No. 39 of 1935
Vyfhoek Management Act, 1935
The whole
Act No. I Of 1936
Vyfhnek hlamrgemen[ Amendment Act. 1936
The whole
Act No 4 of 1937
Vairl River Development Scheme (Amendnwn! ) Ac(, 1937
The whole
Act No. 16 of 1937
Uitenhage (Gmendal)  Water (P[-ivate) Act, 1937
The whole
Act No. 19 nf 1937
Mapochs Gronden Amendment Act, 1937
The whole
ACI No 20 of 1937
The D.rbun Waterworks (Privtite) Act. 1937
The whole
Act No. 15 of 1939
Cannon Island Settlement Mmragenwm~  Act, 1939
The whole
ACI N(). 10 of 1943
Oliphaots River Irrigatlurr Works Act, 1943
The whole
Act No. 18 of 1944
Vhal River Development Scheme (Anwndmcn[)  Act,
The whole
I 944
Act No, ? I of 1944
lrrlgotiml Districts Acfjustmen[  Act. 19-M
The whole
Ac[ N{). I I (,f 1945
The Durban Waterworks ( Private) Act Amendment
The whole
( Private) Ac[, 1945
Act No, 23 of 1945
Salckmha Bay Water Supply Act. 1945
The whole
Act N{~. 37 of 1946
N’Jelcle Irrigation District Adjustment Act. 1946
The whole
Act N{) ?3 of 1947
Kllncfrift Sculernent Act. 1947
The whole
Act N[~. 24 ot” 1947
Skanskop Settlement Act. 1947
The whnle
ACI N{) 37 of 1947
V) lhuel. Management Anwndmcnt Act, 1947
The whole
Act N(~. 5 of 19-IX
The Ourban  Waterworks ( Privtitc)  Act Further Amend-
The whole
ment (Privlte) Act, 1948


--- PAGE 100 ---

] OS
No. 1°182
GOVERNMENT GAZETTE, 26 AUGUST 1998
Act N(). 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATER ACT, 1998
Number id year 01 \ct
Short title
Extent nf repeal
AL’1 No 2 I ()( l~Mx
Vaal River Dcvelupnmn~  Scbcme Amendment Act,
The whole
I (J.~x
Act N(), 22 of 1948
Ilartebc!cstprmr[  Irrigation Scheme (Crc)ctxlilc River)
The whole
Amendment ACI. 1948
Act N,). 31 I)f’ 1948
Brrlf’clspoorl  irrigation Scheme Ac’(, 19.$X
The whole
Act N{). 7 of 1949
l[-rigullon  Comn)lssion Repeal Act, 1949
The whole
Ac( NI). 24 uf 1949
fhpm)rt irrigation Scheme Act, 1949
The whole
Act N(), 34011949
Irrigtition Amendment Act, 1949
The whole
ACI No. 17 of !950
RmId Wa(er fhrd Statutes ( Pnvatc ) Act, 1950
The whole
Ac[ No. 23 UI 1950
Olllantsnek  Irrig:ltion  District Adjustment Ac(, 1950
The whole
Act Nu. 24 of 1950
Breede River Conwrvotion  District Adjustment Act,
Tlw whole
i 950
Act N(). 18 of 1951
Kopjes  lrrigatiun .%ltlcmerrt  Amt!ndmcn~ Act. 1951
The whole
Act No. 4.3 of 19S I
Sahkmhtr f3ay Wtiter Supply Amencfmen[  Act, 195 I
The whole
Act No. 6 of 1952
Southern Suburbs of Cape Tuwn Water Supply Ad
The whule
Anwndnwn~  (Privfitc)  Act, 1952
Ac( N(), 7 of 1952
The Durbdn Waterworks Additional Borrowing Powers
The whule
(Private) ACI, 1952
Act N(). 2 ut’ 1953
I.ichtenburg Wfi(erwurhs  (Priwrte) Act, 1953
The whole
Act No. 37 of 1954
Mooi River Distric( Adjustment Act, 1954
The whule
ACI N(). 42 of 1954
Mupochsgrrmde Irrigation Scheme Act. 1954
The whole
Act Nu. 31 of 1956
lrrigaliun District. Adjustnwnt Act, 1956
Tbe whole
Act N(). 54 of” 1956
Water Act, 1956
Tbe whole
Act No. 45 of 1957
Hxrtcbeestpm)rt Irrigation Scheme (Crucodile River)
The whole
Anwmhnent Act. 1957
Act No. 75 uf 1957
Water Amendment Act, 1957
The whole
Act Nu. 36 of 1960
Durban Waterworks (Private) Act, 196(1
The whole
ACI No, 59 of 196f)
Mtrricu Brrsvcld lrriguticm Scheme Amendment Act.
The whole
1960
Ac( Nu, I of 1961
Vyfhoek Mtmagement Amendment Act. 196 I
The whole
Ac[ No. 56 of’ 196 I
W~kv’  Amendment Act, 1961
The whole
4
I
Act No. I of 1962
Cwnwn Island  Settlement Management Amendment
The whole
Act. 1962
I
Act No. 50 of 1963
Klipch’it’t Settlement Amendment Act, 1963
The whole
Act N(). 63 of 1963
W~wr Amendment Act, 1963
‘rhc whole
Act N(). 75 of 1963
Northern Vyfht)ck Sclllemcnt Adjustment Act, 1963
m whole
ACI No. 29 of’ 1964
KMNI Waler Board Sta[utes (P[-iv~te) Act, Amendment
‘rhc whole
Act, 1964
Acl No. 35 of 1964
Kopjcs ll-l-igati(m SeItlcnwnt Adjustmem Act, 1964
The WIN)IC
Act N(). 36 of 1964
C)lifants Riw (Oucftshoorn)  Act, 1964
Tbc W]lOIC
Act N(). 28 of 1965
Great Fish River Irrigation Di\trict Adjustment Amend-
The whole
ment Ac(, 1965
Act N(). 71 of 1965
Water Amendment ACI, 196S
The whole
Act N(). I I of 1966
Wa[cr Amendment Act. 1966
The WbOk
Aci No. 53 of 1966
Romfcpourt  and Wel(evreden Agriculluml Settlements
The whole
Acljwstments ACI, 1966
Ac[ N,). 71 of 1967
Vaal River Developnwlt Scheme Amendment Act,
Tbe whole
1967
Act No. 73 ut’ 1967
Ma fchirrg  Waterworks (Priviue) Amendment Act, 1967
The whole
Act N(), 79 of 1967
Water Amendment Act, 1967
The whole
Act N{). 34 of 196X
Wawrval River ( Lycienhurg) Act, 1968
The whole


--- PAGE 101 ---

3)()
N(), 19182
GOV’:RNMf3NT GAZETTE, 26 A(JGUST  1998
Act No. 36, 1998
NATIONAL WATF R ACT, 1998
Number and year of Act
Short title
Extent of repeal
Act No. 53 of 1969
Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) Act Amendment
The whole
Act, 1969
Act No. 77 of 1969
Water Amendment Act, 1969
The whole
Act No. 78 of 1969
Orange River Development Project ~ \ct, 1969
The whole
Act No, 68 of 1970
Van Wyksvlei Settlement Regulation Act, 1970
The whole
Act No. 36 of 1971
Water Amendment Act, 197 I
The whole
Act No. 31 of 1972
Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) Act Amendment
The whole
I
Act No. 105 of 1977
Vaal River Development Scheme Ar Iendmenf  Act,
The whole
t Q77
I
Act No. 108 of 1977
Water Amendment Act. 1977
Act No. 34 of’ 1978
=
Irrigation Districts Adjustment Amel dment Act 1978
Act No. 73 of !978
Water Amendment Act, 1978
Ac( No. 5 I of 1979
Water Amendment Act, 1979
Act No. 92 of 1980
Water Amendment Act, 1980
Act No. 8 of 1982
-
Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) Amendment Act,
1982
Act No. I I of 1982
Vaal River Development Scheme Ar\endment Act,
The whole
~“
.9
The whole
Sections 7, 8 and
AcI No. 110 of 1986
W~ter Amendment Act, 1986
The whole
Act No. 68 of 1987
Water Amendment Act, 1987
The whole
Act No. 37 of 1988
Water Amendment Act, 1988
The whole
Act No. 38 of 1988
Water Act (Bophuthatswana),  1988
The whole
Act No. 40 of 1988
Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) Act Amendment
The whole
Act, 1988
Act No. 36 of 1990
Rand Water Board Statutes (Private) Act Amendment
The whole
Act, 1990
Act No. 68 of 1990
Water Amendment Act, 1990
The whole
Acr No. 160f 1991
Water Amendment Act, 199 I
The whole
Act No. 92 of 1993
Water Amendment Act, 1993
The whole
Act No. 32 of [994
Water Laws Rationalisation and Amc;dment  Act, 1994
The whole
Act No. 51 of 1995
Water Amendment Act, 1995
!’
The whole
Act No. 58 of 1997
Water Amendment Act, 1997
The whole
