

--- PAGE 1 ---

3
PREFACE
The Swedish Environmental Code was adopted in 1998 and
entered into force 1 January 1999. The rules contained within
15 acts have been amalgameted in the Code. As many similar
rules in previous statutes have been replaced with common
rules, the number of provisions has been reduced. The
Environmental Code is nonetheless a major piece of legislation.
The Code contains 33 chapters comprising almost 500 sections.
However, it is only the fundamental environmental rules that
are included in the Environmental Code. More detailed
provisions are laid down in ordinances made by the
Government.
The translation takes account of amendments that have been
made since the Code entered into force up to 1 August 2000.
References to the laws adopting the amendments are given in
parantheses and show the reference number of the law in
question. However, laws regulating transitional arrangements
or dates of entry into force have not been included.
The two annexes specifying the environmental classes of
petrol and diesel fuels are not included in the translation.
The Ministry of Environment publishes the translation as a
service to interested persons but takes no legal responsibility
for the translation or for any consequenses arising from its use.


--- PAGE 2 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
5
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL CODE...............................................9 
PART ONE ..........................................................................9 
GENERAL PROVISIONS................................................................9 
Chapter 1. Objectives and area of application of the 
Environmental Code.......................................................9 
Chapter 2. General rules of consideration etc........................13 
Chapter 3. Basic provisions concerning the management 
of land and water areas..................................................17 
Chapter 4. Special provisions concerning land and water 
management in certain areas in Sweden.......................21 
Chapter 5. Environmental quality standards..........................27 
Chapter 6. Environmental impact statements and other 
decision guidance data ..................................................31 
PART TWO ........................................................................37 
PROTECTION OF NATURE ..............................................................37 
Chapter 7. Protection of areas.................................................37 
Chapter 8. Special provisions concerning the protection 
of animal and plant species...........................................47 
PART THREE.....................................................................49 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.......49 
Chapter 9. Environmentally hazardous activities and 
health protection...........................................................49 
Chapter 10. Polluted areas.......................................................55 
Chapter 11. Water operations .................................................59 
Chapter 12. Quarries, agriculture and other activities...........67 


--- PAGE 3 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
6
Chapter 13. Genetic engineering............................................ 71 
Chapter 14. Chemical products and biotechnical 
organisms...................................................................... 75 
Chapter 15. Waste and producer responsibility .................... 83 
PART FOUR.......................................................................91 
CONSIDERATION OF CASES AND MATTERS ............................... 91 
Chapter 16. General provisions concerning the 
consideration of cases and matters.............................. 91 
Chapter 17. The Government’s consideration of 
permissibility ................................................................ 97 
Chapter 18. The Government’s reviews of decisions etc. 
which have been appealed against.............................. 101 
Chapter 19. Consideration of matters by administrative 
authorities and municipalities.................................... 103 
Chapter 20. Courts................................................................ 107 
Chapter 21. Cases in environmental courts......................... 111 
Chapter 22. The procedure for application cases in 
environmental courts ................................................. 115 
Chapter 23. Proceedings in the Superior Environmental 
Court and the Supreme Court................................... 125 
Chapter 24. Validity and reviews etc. of permits................. 129 
Chapter 25. Litigation costs and similar costs..................... 135 
PART FIVE.......................................................................139 
SUPERVISION ETC......................................................................... 139 
Chapter 26. Supervision ........................................................ 139 
Chapter 27. Charges and fees ............................................... 147 
Chapter 28. Access etc. ......................................................... 151 
PART SIX ........................................................................157 
PENALTIES................................................................................... 157 
Chapter 29. Penalty provisions and forfeiture..................... 157 
Chapter 30. Environmental sanction charges...................... 165 
PART SEVEN ...................................................................167 
COMPENSATION ETC.............................................................. 167 


--- PAGE 4 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
7
Chapter 31. Compensation in connection with public 
interventions and permit application procedures 
relating to water operation etc. ..................................167 
Chapter 32. Compensation for certain kinds of 
environmental damage and other private claims.......181 
Chapter 33. Environmental damage insurance and 
environmental clean-up insurance .............................185 
 


--- PAGE 5 ---

 
9
THE ENVIRONMENTAL CODE 
 
PART ONE  
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapter 1. Objectives and area of application of the 
Environmental Code 
Section 1  
The purpose of this Code is to promote 
sustainable development which will assure a healthy and sound 
environment 
for 
present 
and 
future 
generations. 
Such 
development will be based on recognition of the fact that nature is 
worthy of protection and that our right to modify and exploit 
nature carries with it a responsibility for wise management of 
natural resources. 
The Environmental Code shall be applied in such a way as to 
ensure that: 
1. human health and the environment are protected against 
damage and detriment, whether caused by pollutants or other 
impacts; 
2. valuable natural and cultural environments are protected and 
preserved; 
3. biological diversity is preserved; 
4. the use of land, water and the physical environment in general 
is such as to secure a long term good management in ecological, 
social, cultural and economic terms; and 
5. reuse and recycling, as well as other management of materials, 
raw materials and energy are encouraged with a view to establishing 
and maintaining natural cycles. 
 


--- PAGE 6 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
10
Section 2 
The provisions of chapters 3 and 4 shall only be 
applicable in connection with the consideration of matters referred 
to in chapter 7, the examination of activities for which permits are 
required pursuant to chapters 9, 11 and 12 and the Government’s 
permissibility assessments referred to in chapter 17 and also to the 
extent provided for in the Civil Aviation Act (1957:297), the 
Continental Shelf Act (1966:314), the Roads Act (1971:948), the 
Certain Pipelines Act (1978:160), the Establishment, Enlargement 
and Closure of Public Navigation Channels and Public Ports Act 
(1983:293), the Certain Peat Deposits Act (1985:620), the 
Planning and Building Act (1987:10), the Minerals Act (1991:45), 
the Sweden’s Economic Zone Act (1992:1140), the Construction 
of Railways Act (1995:1649), the Electricity Act (1997:857) and 
the Natural Gas Act (2000:599). (Law 2000:600) 
 
Section 3  
In 
addition 
to 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
Environmental Code, the provisions of other Acts shall be 
applicable to activities that may cause damage or detriment to 
human health, the environment or other interests that are 
protected by this Code. 
The provisions of the Work Environment Act (1997:1160) shall 
be applicable to prevention of illness and accidents at work and to 
other matters relating primarily to the work environment. 
 
Section 4 
The relevant provisions of the Boundary River 
Agreement of September 16, 1971 between Sweden and Finland 
Act (1971:850) shall be applicable to certain environmentally 
hazardous activities and certain water operations. 
 
Section 5 
The Government may, to the extent necessary in 
order to strengthen defence preparedness in special circumstances, 
issue rules for the total defence by way of derogation from this 
Code; this shall not apply, however, to areas in which provisions 
must be enacted by law. 
 
Section 6 
Provisions concerning the consequences of the 
Treaty on European Union and other instruments and of the 
decisions of the European Communities are contained in the Act 
(1994:1500) on the Occasion of Sweden’s Accession to the 
European Union. 
 


--- PAGE 7 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
11
Section 7  
Section 26 of the Roads Act (1971:948) shall be 
applicable to refuse collection in certain road areas and adjacent 
areas. 
Chapter 1, section 2 a and chapter 3, section 1 of the Civil 
Aviation Act (1957:297) shall be applicable to the flying of aircraft 
at supersonic speeds and the environment-worthiness of aircraft. 
Section 23 of the Certain Pipelines Act (1978:160) shall be 
applicable in certain cases to the laying and use of pipelines. 
Chapter 2 section 3 of the Natural Gas Act (2000:599) shall be 
applicable to building of natural gas pipelines. (Law 2000:600). 
 


--- PAGE 8 ---

 
13
Chapter 2. General rules of consideration etc. 
Section 1 
In connection with the consideration of matters 
relating to permissibility, permits, approvals and exemptions and of 
conditions other than those relating to compensation, and in 
connection with supervision pursuant to this Code, persons who 
pursue an activity or take a measure, or intend to do so, shall show 
that the obligations arising out of this chapter have been complied 
with. This shall also apply to persons who have pursued activities 
that may have caused damage or detriment to the environment. 
For the purposes of this chapter, ‘measures’ shall mean measures 
that are not of negligible significance in individual cases. 
 
Section 2 
Persons who pursue an activity or take a measure, 
or intend to do so, must possess the knowledge that is necessary in 
view of the nature and scope of the activity or measure to protect 
human health and the environment against damage or detriment. 
 
Section 3  
Persons who pursue an activity or take a measure, 
or intend to do so, shall implement protective measures, comply 
with restrictions and take any other precautions that are necessary 
in order to prevent, hinder or combat damage or detriment to 
human health or the environment as a result of the activity or 
measure. For the same reason, the best possible technology shall be 
used in connection with professional activities. 
Such precautions shall be taken as soon as there is cause to 
assume that an activity or measure may cause damage or detriment 
to human health or the environment. 
 
Section 4  
In the case of activities and measures for whose 
purposes land or water areas are used, unless on a purely temporary 
basis, a suitable site shall be selected with regard to the provisions 
of chapter 1, section 1 and chapters 3 and 4. 
Sites for activities and measures shall always be chosen in such a 
way as to make it possible to achieve their purpose with a 
minimum of damage or detriment to human health and the 
environment. 
 
Section 5 
Persons who pursue an activity or take a measure 
shall conserve raw materials and energy and reuse and recycle them 


--- PAGE 9 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
14
wherever possible. Preference shall be given to renewable energy 
sources. 
 
Section 6 
Persons who pursue an activity or take a measure, 
or intend to do so, shall avoid using or selling chemical products or 
biotechnical organisms that may involve risks to human health or 
the environment if products or organisms that are assumed to be 
less dangerous can be used instead. The same requirement shall 
apply to goods that contain or are treated with a chemical product 
or a biotechnical organism. 
 
Section 7  
The rules of consideration laid down in sections 2 
to 6 shall be applicable where compliance cannot be deemed 
unreasonable. Particular importance shall be attached in this 
connection to the benefits of protective measures and other 
precautions in relation to their cost. The cost-benefit relationship 
shall also be taken into account in assessments relating to total 
defence activities or where a total defence measure is necessary. 
A decision reached in accordance with the first paragraph must 
not entail infringement of an environmental quality standard 
referred to in chapter 5. 
 
Section 8 
Persons who pursue or have pursued an activity or 
taken a measure that causes damage or detriment to the 
environment shall be responsible, until such time as the damage or 
detriment ceases, for remedying it to the extent deemed reasonable 
pursuant to chapter 10. Where this Code so provides, the person 
may be liable for compensation for the damage or detriment 
instead. 
 
Section 9  
If an activity or measure is likely to cause 
significant damage or detriment to human health or the 
environment, 
even 
where 
protective 
measures 
and 
other 
precautions are taken as required by this Code, the activity or the 
measure may only be undertaken in special circumstances. 
An activity or measure must not be undertaken if it is liable to 
lead to a significant deterioration in the living conditions of a large 
number of people or substantial detriment to the environment. 
The provisions of the first and second paragraph shall not be 
applicable where the Government permits the activity pursuant to 
chapter 17, section 1, 3 or 4. 
 


--- PAGE 10 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
15
Section 10  
If an activity or measure is of particular 
importance for reasons of public interest, the Government may 
permit it even in the circumstances mentioned in section 9, second 
paragraph. Nevertheless, this shall not apply if the activity or 
measure is likely to be detrimental to public health. 
Conditions may be attached to decisions taken pursuant to the first 
paragraph in order to safeguard a public interest. 
 


--- PAGE 11 ---

 
17
Chapter 3. Basic provisions concerning the management of land 
and water areas 
Section 1 
Land and water areas shall be used for the 
purposes for which the areas are best suited in view of their nature 
and situation and of existing needs. Priority shall be given to use 
that promotes good management from the point of view of public 
interest. 
 
Section 2 
Large land and water areas that are not, or are only 
to a small extent, affected by development projects or other 
environmental intrusion shall, to the extent possible, be protected 
against measures that may significantly affect their character. 
 
Section 3 
Land and water areas that are particularly 
vulnerable from an ecological point of view shall, to the extent 
possible, be protected against measures that may damage the 
natural environment. 
 
Section 4  
Agriculture 
and 
forestry 
are 
of 
national 
importance.  
Agricultural land that is suitable for cultivation may only be used 
for development or building purposes if this is necessary in order 
to safeguard significant national interests where this need cannot 
be met satisfactorily from the point of view of public interest by 
using other land. 
Forest land that is of importance for forestry shall, to the extent 
possible, be protected against measures that may be prejudicial to 
rational forestry. 
 
Section 5  
Land and water areas that are important for 
reindeer husbandry, commercial fishing or aquaculture shall, to the 
extent possible, be protected against measures that may 
significantly interfere with the operation of these industries.  
Areas that are of national interest for the purposes of reindeer 
husbandry or commercial fishing shall be protected against 
measures referred to in the first paragraph. 
 
Section 6  
Land and water areas, as well as the physical 
environment in general, that are important for reasons of public 


--- PAGE 12 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
18
interest on account of their natural or cultural value or for outdoor 
recreation shall, to the extent possible, be protected against 
measures that damage the natural or cultural environment. Special 
consideration shall be given to the need for green spaces in and 
near urban areas. 
Areas of national interest for the purposes of nature 
conservation, conservation of the cultural environment or outdoor 
recreation shall be protected against measures referred to in the 
first paragraph. 
 
Section 7  
Land and water areas that contain valuable 
substances or materials shall, to the extent possible, be protected 
against measures that may be prejudicial to their extraction.  
Areas that contain deposits of substances or materials of national 
interest shall be protected against measures referred to in the first 
paragraph. 
 
Section 8  
Land and water areas that are particularly suitable 
as sites for facilities for industrial production, energy production, 
energy distribution, communications, water supply or waste 
treatment shall, to the extent possible, be protected against 
measures that may be prejudicial to the establishment or use of 
such sites. 
Areas that are of national interest on account of facilities 
mentioned in the first paragraph shall be protected against 
measures that may be prejudicial to the establishment or use of 
such sites. 
 
Section 9  
Land and water areas that are important for total 
defence purposes shall, to the extent possible, be protected against 
measures that may be detrimental to the interests of the total 
defence. 
Areas that are of national interest because they are needed for 
total defence installations shall be protected against measures that 
may be prejudicial to the establishment or use of such sites. 
 
Section 10  
Where any of the areas mentioned in sections 5 to 
8 are of national interest for incompatible purposes, priority shall 
be given to the purpose or purposes that are most likely to 
promote sustainable management of land, water and the physical 
environment in general. If the area, or part of the area, is needed 


--- PAGE 13 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
19
for a total defence installation, priority shall be given to the 
defence interest. 
Decisions taken pursuant to the first paragraph must not be 
contrary to the provisions of chapter 4. 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---

 
21
Chapter 4. Special provisions concerning land and water 
management in certain areas in Sweden 
Section 1 
The areas mentioned in sections 2 to 7 are of 
national interest in their entirety in view of the natural and cultural 
assets 
that 
exist 
there. 
Development 
projects 
or 
other 
environmental interventions may only be undertaken in these areas 
where they are not contrary to the provisions of sections 2 to 7 and 
can be implemented in a manner that does not significantly damage 
the natural and cultural assets of these areas. 
The provisions of the first paragraph and sections 2 to 6 shall not 
be an obstacle to the development of existing urban areas or local 
industry or the construction of installations that are needed for the 
purposes of the total defence. Where special circumstances exist, 
these provisions shall not prevent the erection of structures for the 
extraction of deposits of substances or materials referred to in 
chapter 3, section 7 second paragraph. 
 
Section 2  
In the following areas special consideration shall 
be given to the interests of tourism and outdoor recreation, in 
particular outdoor recreational exercise, in connection with 
assessments of the permissibility of development projects or other 
environmental intrusion: 
the coastal area and archipelago of Bohuslän from the 
Norwegian border to Lysekil; 
the coastal area of Halland; 
Kullaberg and Hallandsåsen and the adjoining coastal areas; 
the coastal area of Skåne from Örnahusen south of Skillinge to 
Åhus; 
the coastal areas and archipelagoes of Småland and Östergötland 
from Oskarshamn to Arkösund; 
the coastal areas and archipelagoes of Södermanland and 
Uppland from Oxelösund to Herräng and Singö; 
the coastal area and archipelago of Ångermanland from 
Storfjärden at the mouth of the Ångermanälven river to Skagsudde; 
the coastal area and archipelago of Norrbotten from 
Bondöfjärden to the Finnish border; 
Öland; 
Gotland; 


--- PAGE 15 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
22
the lake and ridge landscape around the Romeleåsen ridge in 
Skåne; 
Lake Åsnen, including islands and shore areas, and the areas to 
the south around the Mörrumsån river and Lake Mien to 
Pukaviksbukten Bay and Listerlandet;  
Lake Vänern, including islands and shore areas; 
Lake Vättern, including islands and shore areas; 
Tiveden forest and the areas around Lake Unden and Lake Viken 
and the area around the Göta Canal between Karlsborg and 
Sjötorp; 
the Dalsland-Nordmarken area from Mellerud and Lake 
Ånimmen near Lake Vänern to the lake system from Dals-Ed in 
the south to Årjäng and Östervallskog in the north; 
Fryksdalen from Kil to Torsby and the area around the upper 
reaches of the Klarälven river in Torsby municipality; 
Lake Mälaren, including islands and shore areas; 
the 
Malingsbo-Kloten 
area 
between 
Storå, 
Kopparberg, 
Smedjebacken and Skinnskatteberg; 
the area around the Dalälven river from Avesta to Skutskär; 
Lake Siljan and Lake Orsasjön, including islands and shore areas, 
and the area around the Oreälven river, Lake Skattungen and Lake 
Oresjön, including the area to the south from Gulleråsen and Boda 
to Rättvik; 
the area around the Ljusnan river from Färila to Bergvik; 
the Vindelådalen river valley; 
the mountain area from the Transtrandsfjällen mountains in the 
south to Treriksröset, with the exception of the mountain areas 
mentioned in section 5. 
 
Section 3 
 Activities and operations referred to in chapter 
17, section 1, points 1-11 and 17 must not be established in the 
coastal areas and archipelagoes of Bohuslän from the Norwegian 
border to Brofjorden, in Småland and Östergötland from 
Simpevarp to Arkösund, in Ångermanland from Storfjärden at the 
mouth of the Ångermanälven river to Skagsudde, or in Öland. 
 
Section 4  
In coastal areas and archipelagoes from Brofjorden 
to Simpevarp and from Arkösund to Forsmark, along the coast of 
Gotland, in Östergarn and Storsudret, Gotland and Fårö, 
permanent recreation accommodation may only be built as a 
complement to existing buildings. Nevertheless, where special 
reasons exist, other recreation accommodation may be built, in 


--- PAGE 16 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
23
particular accommodation that satisfies the needs of outdoor 
recreational exercise or consists of simple holiday houses near the 
main centres of population. 
 
In the areas mentioned in the first paragraph, activities and 
operations referred to in chapter 17, section 1, points 1-7 and 10-11 
may only be established in locations where activities and operations 
already exist that are subject to a permit application procedure 
pursuant to those provisions. 
 
Section 5 
Buildings and structures may only be established 
in 
the 
Långfjället-Rogen, 
Sylarna-Helags, 
Skäckerfjällen, 
Burvattnet, Hotagsfjällen, Frostviken-Borgafjällen, Marsfjällen-
Vardofjällen, 
Artfjället, 
Tärna-Vindelfjällen, 
Sarek-Mavas, 
Kebnekaise-Sjaunja, Rostu and Pessinkin mountain areas where 
they are necessary for the purposes of reindeer husbandry, the 
resident population, scientific research or outdoor recreational 
exercise. Other measures may only be taken in these areas if they 
do not affect their character. 
 
Section 6  
Hydroelectric power stations must not be built and 
water regulation and diversion for the purposes of power 
generation must not be undertaken in the Torneälven, Kalixälven, 
Piteälven and Vindelälven national rivers, including their water 
areas, source rivers and tributaries, nor in the following water areas, 
including their source rivers and tributaries: 
 
The Dalälven river 
The upstream section of 
 
the Västerdalälven river 
  
The Hummelforsen and 
 
Österdalälven rivers 
 
upstream of Trängslet 
The Ljusnan river  
The 
Voxnan 
river 
 
upstream of Vallhaga 
The Ljungan river  
The 
Ljungan 
river 
 
upstream 
of 
Lake 
 
Storsjön and the Gimån 
 
river upstream of Lake 
 
Holmsjön 
The Indalsälven river 
The 
Åreälven, 
 
Ammerån, 
Storån-
 
Dammån 
and 
 
Hårkan rivers 


--- PAGE 17 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
24
The Ångermanälven river  
The Lejarälven river, the 
 
Storån river upstream of 
 
Lake Klumpvattnet, the 
 
Långselån-
 
Rörströmsälven 
river, 
 
the Saxån river, the 
 
Ransarån river upstream 
 
of Lake Ransarn and the 
 
Vojmån river upstream 
 
of Lake Vojmsjön 
The Vapstälven river 
The Moälven river 
The Lögdeälven river 
The Öreälven river 
The Umeälven river 
The Tärnaån, Girjesån 
 
and 
Juktån 
rivers 
 
upstream 
of 
Lake 
 
Fjosoken 
The Sävarån river 
The Skellefteälven river 
The 
source 
rivers 
 
upstream 
of 
Lake 
 
Sädvajaure, 
 
Lake Riebnes and the 
 
Malån river 
The Byskeälven river 
The Åbyälven river 
The Luleälven river 
The 
Stora 
Luleälven 
 
river upstream of Lake 
Akkajaure, 
the 
Lilla 
Luleälven 
river 
upstream of 
  
Lake Skalka and Lake 
 
Tjaktjajaure, and the 
 
Pärlälven river 
The Råneälven river 
The Emån river 
The Bräkneån river 
The Mörrumsån river 
The Fylleån river 
The Enningdalsälven river  
The 
Enningdalsälven 
 
river upstream of the 
 
Norwegian border 


--- PAGE 18 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
25
 
 
Hydroelectric power stations must not be built and water 
regulation and diversion for the purposes of power generation 
must not be undertaken in the following sections of river: 
 
The Klarälven river 
The section between 
 
Höljes and Edebäck 
The Dalälven river 
The Västerdalälven river 
 
downstream of  
 
Skiffsforsen and the 
 
Dalälven river down- 
 
stream of  Näs bruk 
The Ljusnan river  
The section between  
 
Hede and Svegsjön and  
 
the section between  
Laforsen and 
Arbråsjöarna 
The Ljungan river  
The section between  
 
Lake Havern and Lake 
 
Holmsjön and the  
 
section downstream of  
 
Viforsen 
The Indalsälven river 
The Långan river   
 
downstream of Lake  
 
Landösjön 
The Ångermanälven river  
The Faxälven river  
 
between Edsele and 
 
Lake Helgumsjön 
The Umeälven river 
The Tärnaforsen river  
 
between Lake Stor- 
 
Laisan and Lake 
 
Gäuta 
 
The first and the second paragraph shall not apply to water 
operations that only make a minor environmental impact. 
 
Section 7  
The Ulriksdal-Haga-Brunnsviken-Djurgården area 
is a national urban park. 
New development, new buildings and other measures shall only be 
permissible in national urban parks if they can be undertaken 
without encroaching on park landscapes or the natural 
environment and without detriment to any other natural and 
cultural assets of the historical landscape. 
 


--- PAGE 19 ---

 
27
Chapter 5. Environmental quality standards 
Provisions concerning environmental quality 
Section 1 
The Government may issue rules with respect to 
certain geographical areas or to the country as a whole concerning 
the quality of land, water, air or the environment in general if this 
is necessary in order to provide lasting protection for human health 
or the environment or to remedy adverse effects on human health 
or the environment (environmental quality standards). 
The Government may instruct a public authority to issue 
environmental 
quality 
standards 
arising 
out 
of 
Sweden’s 
membership of the European Union. 
Matters to be specified in environmental quality standards 
Section 2  
Environmental quality standards shall specify the 
levels of pollution or disturbance to which the population may be 
exposed without any risk of significant detriment or to which the 
environment or nature may be exposed without any risk of 
substantial detriment. 
The levels specified in environmental quality standards must be 
complied with after a specified date. They shall indicate: 
1. the maximum or minimum occurrence in soil, surface water 
and groundwater, air or the environment in general of chemical 
products or biotechnical organisms; 
2. the maximum levels for noise, vibration, light, radiation or 
other such impacts; or 
3. the maximum or minimum level or value relating to the water 
level or the flow in water systems, watercourses, groundwater or 
parts thereof. 
Environmental quality standards may also specify the maximum 
or minimum occurrence in surface water and groundwater of 
organisms that can serve as indicators of the state of the 
environment. 
Environmental quality standards shall be reviewed whenever 
necessary. 


--- PAGE 20 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
28
Compliance with environmental quality standards 
Section 3  
Public authorities and municipalities shall ensure 
compliance with the environmental quality standards that are 
adopted pursuant to section 1 in connection with: 
- decisions concerning permissibility, permits, approvals, 
exemptions and notifications, 
- supervision; or  
- the issuance of rules. 
Municipalities and public authorities shall comply with 
environmental quality standards in conjunction with planning. 
 
Section 4  
Activities shall be pursued in such a way as not to 
infringe environmental quality standards. 
Provisions pursuant to which permits must not be granted for 
activities which entail the infringement of an environmental quality 
standard are contained in chapter 16, section 5. Provisions pursuant 
to which permits or conditions attached to permits may be 
reviewed where the activity is significantly responsible for the 
infringement of an environmental quality standard are contained in 
chapter 24, section 5, point 2. 
Action programmes 
Section 5  
An action programme shall be established if this is 
necessary for compliance with an environmental quality standard 
or in consequence of Sweden’s membership of the European 
Union. In such cases the Government shall, in connection with the 
issuance of rules pursuant to section 1 or when the need arises, 
adopt such an action programme or decide that one or more public 
authorities 
or 
municipalities 
shall 
establish 
such 
action 
programmes. The Government may instruct a public authority to 
adopt an action programme arising out of Sweden’s membership of 
the European Union. 
In the event of failure to comply with an environmental quality 
standard for a geographical area because the environment is 
affected by an activity pursued outside the area, the Government or 
the authority appointed by the Government shall establish an 
action programme for the whole of the area in which there occur 
disturbances that affect the possibility of compliance with the 
standard. 


--- PAGE 21 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
29
Before a public authority or municipality establishes an action 
programme, it shall consult other authorities and municipalities 
that are affected and operators who are significantly affected. An 
action programme that is established by a municipality shall be 
adopted by the municipal council. 
The action programme shall be sent to the authorities designated 
by the Government. 
For the purposes of this section, ‘municipalities’ shall include 
associations of municipalities. 
 
Section 6  
An action programme may relate to any activities 
that may affect the levels of pollution or disturbance referred to in 
section 2 first paragraph. An action programme shall specify: 
1. the environmental quality standard that is to be complied 
with; 
2. the measures to be taken to ensure compliance with the 
environmental quality standard by the date referred to in section 2 
second paragraph; 
3. the authorities and municipalities which shall ensure that the 
specified measures are taken; and 
4. the time limits by which the measures are to be completed. 
Action programmes shall be reviewed whenever necessary, and at 
least once every five years. 
Examination of action programmes 
Section 7 
The Government may provide that certain action 
programmes shall be examined by the Government. 
Action plans 
Section 8 
The Government may establish any action plans 
that may be necessary in consequence of Sweden’s membership of 
the European Union or decide that one or more authorities or 
municipalities or associations of municipalities shall establish such 
action plans. 
 
 


--- PAGE 22 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
30
Measurements and checks 
Section 9  
In connection with the issuance of the rules 
referred to in section 1 the Government shall also decide who shall 
carry out the measurements that are needed to check compliance 
with an environmental quality standard. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules concerning measuring methods and the 
presentation of results. 
 


--- PAGE 23 ---

 
31
Chapter 6. Environmental impact statements and other decision 
guidance data 
When environmental impact statements are required 
Section 1 
An environmental impact statement shall be 
submitted together with an application for a permit referred to in 
chapters 9, 11 and 12 or in rules issued pursuant to this Code. Such 
a statement shall also be submitted for the purposes of 
permissibility assessments pursuant to chapter 17. 
The Government may provide that an environmental impact 
statement shall also be prepared for the purposes of applications 
for exemption or other matters governed by this Code or rules 
issued in pursuance thereof where this is necessary to make it 
possible to assess the environmental impact. The Government may 
also provide for exemptions from the requirement to prepare an 
environmental impact statement pursuant to the first paragraph 
where the environmental impact of the activities is likely to be 
minor. 
 
Section 2  
Where it is necessary to facilitate an assessment of 
environmental impact, the Government may provide that an 
environmental impact statement shall be submitted: 
1. in a matter governed by another Act which provides that 
human health or the environment shall be taken into account in 
connection with application of the Act; 
2. in matters other than those referred to in section 1 to which 
the Environmental Code is applicable. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to 
environmental impact statements referred to in the first paragraph, 
unless other provision is made. 
The purpose of environmental impact assessments  
Section 3 
The 
purpose 
of 
an 
environmental 
impact 
assessment is to establish and describe the direct and indirect 
impact of a planned activity or measure on people, animals, plants, 
land, water, air, the climate, the landscape and the cultural 


--- PAGE 24 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
32
environment, on the management of land, water and the physical 
environment in general, and on other management of materials, 
raw materials and energy. Another purpose is to enable an overall 
assessment to be made of this impact on human health and the 
environment. 
The purpose of an environmental impact assessment involving 
an activity covered by the Act (1999:381) on Measures to Prevent 
and Limit the Consequences of Serious Chemical Accidents, is also 
to identify and assess factors surrounding the activity that may 
affect its safety. (Law 1999:385) 
Early consultations and decisions concerning a significant 
environmental impact 
Section 4  
Persons who intend to pursue an activity or take a 
measure for which a permit or decision concerning permissibility is 
required pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in pursuance 
thereof shall consult the county administrative board at an early 
stage. They shall also consult private individuals who are likely to 
be affected and must do so in good time and to an appropriate 
extent before submitting an application for a permit and preparing 
the environmental impact statement that is required in accordance 
with section 1. Prior to consultation, a person who intends to 
pursue an activity shall submit information about the location, 
extent and nature of the planned activity and its anticipated 
environmental impact to the county administrative board and any 
private individuals affected. 
The provisions of the first paragraph shall also apply to matters 
for which an environmental impact statement is required pursuant 
to section 1 second paragraph. 
Following the consultation, the county administrative board 
shall decide whether the activity or measure is likely to have a 
significant environmental impact. Such a decision shall not be 
appealable. Before the decision is taken, an opinion shall be 
obtained on the matter from the supervisory authority, provided 
that the latter is not a county administrative board. 
The Government may specify activities and measures that are 
always likely to have a significant environmental impact. 
 
 


--- PAGE 25 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
33
Extended consultations, including an environmental impact 
assessment 
Section 5 
If the county administrative board decides 
pursuant to section 4 that the activity or measure is likely to have a 
significant environmental impact, an environmental impact 
assessment procedure shall be held. In such a procedure the person 
who intends to undertake the activity or measure shall consult the 
other government agencies, the municipalities, the citizens and the 
organizations that are likely to be affected. The consultation shall 
relate to the location, scope, design and environmental impact of 
the activity or measure and the content and structure of the 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Section 6  
If an activity or measure is likely to have a 
significant environmental impact in another country, the 
responsible authority designated by the Government shall inform 
the competent authority in that country about the planned activity 
or measure and give the country concerned and the citizens who 
are affected the opportunity to take part in a consultation 
procedure concerning the application and the environmental 
impact assessment. 
Such information shall also be supplied where another country 
which is likely to be exposed to a significant environmental impact 
so requests. 
Contents of environmental impact statements 
Section 7  
An environmental impact statement relating to an 
activity or measure that is likely to have a significant environmental 
impact shall contain the information that is needed for the purpose 
referred to in section 3, including: 
1. a description of the activity or measure with details of its 
location, design and scope; 
2. a description of the measures being planned with a view to 
avoiding, mitigating or remedying adverse effects, for example 
action to prevent the activity or measure leading to an infringement 
of an environmental quality standard referred to in chapter 5; 
3. the information that is needed to establish and assess the main 
impact on human health, the environment and management of 


--- PAGE 26 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
34
land, water and other resources that the activity or measure is likely 
to have; 
4. a description of possible alternative sites and alternative 
designs, together with a statement of the reasons why a specific 
alternative was chosen and a description of the consequences if the 
activity or measure is not implemented; and 
5. a non-technical summary of the information specified in 
points 1-4. 
If the county administrative board decides pursuant to section 4 
third paragraph that the activity or measure is likely to have a 
significant environmental impact, it may require that a report 
describing similar ways of achieving the same purpose be submitted 
in conjunction with the description of alternative designs 
mentioned in the first paragraph, point 4. 
In the case of activities or measures that are not likely to have a 
significant environmental impact, the environmental impact 
statement shall contain the information specified in the first 
paragraph to the extent necessary in view of the nature and scope 
of the activity or measure. 
An application in application cases shall, according to chapter 22, 
section 1, first paragraph, point 6 contain a security report if the 
activity applies on the Act (1999:381) on Measures to Prevent and 
Limit the Consequences of Major Chemical Accidents. (Law 
1999:385) 
Notification and opportunity to comment 
Section 8  
When an environmental impact statement is 
prepared in a case or matter relating to environmentally hazardous 
activities or water operations, notification thereof shall be 
published together with the notice of the application referred to in 
chapter 19, section 4 and chapter 22, section 3. If an environmental 
impact statement has been prepared for another case or matter 
concerning an activity or measure that is likely to have a significant 
environmental impact, notification thereof shall be published. If an 
application has been submitted, notification of the environmental 
impact assessment shall be published together with notification of 
the application. The application and the environmental impact 
statement shall thereafter be made available to the public, which 
shall be given the opportunity to comment on them before the case 
or matter is dealt with. 


--- PAGE 27 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
35
When a judgment or a decision is delivered in the case or the 
matter, it shall be published. At the same time, details shall also be 
published of how the public can obtain access to information about 
the decision. The responsible authority in the state with which 
consultation has taken place pursuant to section 6 shall also be 
informed. 
Approval and consideration of environmental impact statements 
Section 9 
The authority that processes an application in a 
case or matter in which an environmental impact statement is 
required shall, by separate decision or in connection with the 
decision on the case or matter, state whether the environmental 
impact statement satisfies the requirements laid down in this 
chapter. Such decisions may not be appealed against separately, but 
only in connection with an appeal against the decision on the case 
or matter. 
When examining applications, the authority shall consider the 
content of the environmental impact statement and the result of 
the consultations and opinions referred to in sections 4 to 6 and 8. 
 
 
The cost of environmental impact statements 
Section 10 
The cost of an environmental impact statement 
and an environmental impact assessment procedure shall be borne 
by the person submitting an application referred to in section 1 or 
who is otherwise required to prepare an environmental impact 
statement. 
Plans and planning documents 
Section 11  
Authorities which are required to apply this Code 
shall ensure that any plans required pursuant to the Planning and 
Building Act (1987:10), together with the relevant planning 
documents, that are needed to clarify matters relating to 
management of land and water are made available in the case or 
matter. 


--- PAGE 28 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
36
If the authority so requests, the municipality must supply plans 
required pursuant to the Planning and Building Act and the 
relevant planning documents. 
 
Section 12 
The county administrative board shall collate any 
studies, programmes and other planning documents in the 
possession of government agencies that are relevant to land and 
water management in the county. Upon request, the county 
administrative board must make such planning documents available 
to the municipalities and authorities responsible for applying this 
Code and to any person who is required to prepare an 
environmental impact statement. 
 
Section 13  
In an individual case the Government may decide 
that one or more municipalities must declare to the Government or 
some other authority how the municipality or municipalities, in 
their planning pursuant to the Planning and Building Act 
(1987:10), intend to: 
1. implement an action programme pursuant to chapter 5, 
section 5 or otherwise facilitate compliance with environmental 
quality standards referred to in chapter 5; and 
2. safeguard interests relating to management of land and water 
pursuant to chapters 3 and 4. 
Government authorities shall notify the Government if the need 
for such a declaration arises. 
 


--- PAGE 29 ---

 
37
PART TWO  
PROTECTION OF NATURE
PROTECTION OF NATURE
PROTECTION OF NATURE
PROTECTION OF NATURE 
Chapter 7. Protection of areas 
The right of access to private land etc. 
Section 1 
Any person who exercises the right of access to 
private land or is in the countryside for any other reason shall treat 
it with due care and consideration. 
National parks 
Section 2 
A land or water area that belongs to the state may 
with the consent of Parliament be designated a national park by the 
Government for the purpose of preserving a large contiguous area 
of a certain landscape type in its natural state or essentially 
unchanged. 
 
Section 3 
Rules concerning the upkeep and management of 
national parks and restrictions on the right to use land or water in 
national parks may be issued by the Government or the authority 
appointed by the Government. 
Nature reserves 
Section 4  
A land or water area may be declared a nature 
reserve by a county administrative board or a municipality for the 
purpose of preserving biological diversity, protecting and 
preserving valuable natural environments or satisfying the need of 
areas for outdoor recreation. 
Any area that is needed for the purpose of protecting, restoring 
or establishing valuable natural environments or habitats for 


--- PAGE 30 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
38
species that are worthy of preservation may also be designated a 
nature reserve. 
 
Section 5  
A decision establishing a nature reserve shall 
contain a statement of the reasons for the decision. 
The decision shall also specify any restrictions on the right to 
use land and water areas that are necessary in order to achieve the 
purpose of the reserve, such as prohibitions against development, 
the erection of fencing, landfill sites, excavation, quarries, 
cultivation, ditching, planting, logging, hunting, fishing and the use 
of pesticides. Such a restriction may include prohibition of access 
to the area throughout the year or during parts of the year. 
If new reasons subsequently emerge or it becomes evident that 
further restrictions must be imposed in order to attain the purpose 
of protection, the municipality or the county administrative board 
may adopt a decision to that effect. 
 
Section 6 
Where it is necessary in order to fulfil the purpose 
of a nature reserve, the county administrative board or the 
municipality may require owners of property and holders of special 
rights thereto to accept the following intrusions in the area: 
1. the building of roads, car parks, trails, rest hostels, camping 
sites, bathing places, sanitary facilities or similar amenities; 
2. public access to land in places where the public does not 
normally have right of access; 
3. thinning, clearing, haymaking, planting, grazing, the erection 
of barriers or similar measures; or 
4. studies of animal and plant species and of soil and water 
conditions. 
 
Section 7  
In 
exceptional 
circumstances 
a 
county 
administrative board or municipality may cancel, wholly or in part, 
a decision it has taken pursuant to sections 4 to 6. 
A county administrative board or municipality may in special 
circumstances grant exemptions from the rules it has issued for a 
nature reserve. A decision to grant an exemption shall cease to 
apply if work on the measure to which the exemption refers does 
not commence within two years or if it is not completed within 
five years of the date when the decision gained legal force. 
As provided in section 29, government permission is required in 
certain cases before a decision to withdraw protection or grant an 


--- PAGE 31 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
39
exemption can be taken with reference to special protection areas 
or special areas of conservation referred to in section 28. 
A decision to withdraw protection or grant an exemption may 
only be taken if reasonable compensation is made in the nature 
reserve or in some other area for the encroachment on the natural 
asset. 
 
Section 8 
Decisions relating to the establishment or 
alteration of nature reserves must not conflict with detailed 
development plans or area regulations adopted pursuant to the 
Planning and Building Act (1987:10). Nevertheless, minor 
modifications may be made if this does not conflict with the 
purposes of the plans or the regulations. 
Culture reserves 
Section 9  
A land or water area may be designated a culture 
reserve for the purpose of preserving valuable cultural landscapes. 
The provisions of sections 4 to 6 shall be applicable to such an area. 
The fact that there is a building or structure in the area that is 
protected as a historical building, a church monument or an 
immovable antiquity pursuant to the Act (1988:950) concerning 
Ancient Monuments and Finds shall not prevent the area being 
designated a culture reserve. 
Sections 7 and 8 shall also be applicable to decisions taken 
pursuant to this section. 
Natural monuments 
Section 10  
A distinctive natural object may be designated a 
natural monument by a county administrative board or a 
municipality if it is in need of special protection or care. The 
designation may also include the land area that is required in order 
to preserve the natural object and give it sufficient space.  
The provisions of sections 5 to 8 concerning nature reserves 
shall also apply to natural monuments. 
 


--- PAGE 32 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
40
Habitat protection areas 
Section 11  
Small land and water areas that constitute habitats 
for endangered animal and plant species or are otherwise 
particularly worthy of protection may be designated habitat 
protection areas by the Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government. Such designations may relate to individual areas 
or all the areas of a certain type in the country or part of the 
country. 
Activities or measures that are liable to damage the natural 
environment must not be undertaken in habitat protection areas. If 
the Government designates all areas of a certain type as habitat 
protection areas, it may in connection with such a decision issue 
rules concerning the granting of exemptions for such activities or 
measures. 
Exemptions 
may 
only 
be 
granted 
in 
special 
circumstances. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may take the necessary measures to conserve habitat protection 
areas. Before a measure is taken, the owner of the area and any 
holders of special rights thereto shall be notified. 
A decision establishing a habitat protection area shall take effect 
immediately even if it is appealed against. 
Wildlife and plant sanctuaries 
Section 12 
If an animal or plant species needs special 
protection in a specific area, over and above the prohibitions 
imposed in chapter 8, sections 1 and 2 or the prohibitions and 
restrictions provided for in the legislation on hunting and fishing, a 
municipality or a county administrative board may issue rules 
restricting the right to hunting or fishing or the right of the public 
or the owner of the land to enter the area. 
Shore protection areas  
Section 13  
Shore protection applies by the sea, lakes and 
watercourses. 
The purpose of shore protection is to assure public access to 
outdoor recreation facilities and to maintain good living conditions 
for plant and animal species on land and in water. 
 


--- PAGE 33 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
41
Section 14  
Land and water areas shall be protected up to 100 
metres from the shoreline at the normal average water level (shore 
protection area). The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may extend this area to not more than 300 metres 
from the shoreline if this is necessary in order to fulfil any of the 
purposes of shore protection. 
A decision extending the shore protection shall take effect 
immediately even if it is appealed against. 
 
Section 15  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may provide that a shore area which is obviously 
of little consequence for fulfilment of the purposes of shore 
protection shall be exempted therefrom. 
In special circumstances, the Government or the authority 
appointed by the Government may provide that a shore protection 
area which is to be included in a detailed development plan or area 
regulations pursuant to the Planning and Building Act (1987:10) 
shall no longer be protected. If the zone ceases to be covered by a 
detailed development plan or area regulations, it shall once again be 
protected. 
 
Section 16 
The following shall be prohibited in shore 
protection areas: 
1. the erection of new buildings; 
2. the alteration of buildings in order to serve a purpose that is 
significantly different from that for which they were previously 
used; 
3. digging or other preparations for the purpose of the 
construction works referred to in points 1 and 2; 
4. the erection of other structures or works which prevent or 
deter the public from entering an area in which it would otherwise 
have been able to move freely or which significantly affect the 
living conditions of animal and plant species; or 
5. other measures which significantly affect the living conditions 
of animal and plant species. 
 
Section 17  
The prohibitions laid down in section 16 shall not 
apply to: 
1. buildings, structures, works or measures that are necessary for 
the purposes of agriculture, fishing, forestry or reindeer husbandry 
and are not used for residential purposes; or 


--- PAGE 34 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
42
2. activities or measures permitted by the Government in 
accordance with chapter 17, section 1, 3 or 4 or for which a permit 
is granted pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in pursuance 
thereof. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may provide that the prohibitions referred to in section 16 shall not 
apply to buildings, structures or works which represent a 
complement to existing buildings on a plot of land and which are 
situated further from the shore than the main building. 
 
Section 18  
A county administrative board may grant 
exemptions from the provisions of section 16 in special 
circumstances. 
If 
an 
exemption 
is 
granted, 
the 
county 
administrative board shall decide the extent to which land may be 
used as a building site or otherwise for the designated purpose. 
A decision to grant an exemption shall cease to apply if work 
does not start on the measure for which the exemption was granted 
within two years or the measure is not completed within five years 
of the date when the decision gained legal force. 
Environmental protection areas 
Section 19 
Large land and water areas may be designated 
environmental protection areas by the Government if special rules 
are necessary because the area or part of the area is affected by 
pollution or is not consistent with an environmental quality 
standard. 
 
Section 20  
The Government or, following government 
authorization, a county administrative board shall issue any rules 
for 
environmental 
protection 
areas 
concerning 
protective 
measures, restrictions and other precautions with respect to 
activities in the area that are necessary in order to fulfil the purpose 
of the area. County administrative boards may in special 
circumstances grant exemptions from the rules issued for an 
environmental protection area. 
Chapter 
10 
contains 
special 
provisions 
concerning 
environmental hazard zones. 
 


--- PAGE 35 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
43
Water protection areas 
Section 21 
A land or water area may be designated a water 
protection area by a county administrative board or a municipality 
for the purpose of protecting surface water or groundwater 
supplies that are, or are likely to be, used as water catchments. 
 
Section 22  
The municipality or the county administrative 
board shall issue rules for water protection areas imposing any 
restrictions on the right to dispose of property in the area that may 
be necessary in order to fulfil the purpose of the area. Where 
necessary, the municipality or the county administrative board may 
stipulate that signs or fences shall be put up and that another’s land 
may be used for this purpose. The rules shall take effect 
immediately even if they are appealed against. 
The county administrative board or the municipality may in 
special circumstances grant exemptions from the rules issued for a 
water protection area. 
Marine research 
Section 23  
In order to protect the marine environment, the 
Government or the authority appointed by the Government may 
provide that marine research must not be undertaken in Swedish 
territorial waters from research vessels that are registered in or 
belong to another state unless permission has been granted for or 
notification submitted of the research. 
Permission for such research may be subject to a time limit and 
to certain conditions. 
Temporary prohibitions 
Section 24  
Following a proposal that an area or an object be 
protected as a nature reserve, a culture reserve, a natural monument 
or a water protection area or that an area or object that is already 
protected be enlarged, a municipality or a county administrative 
board may impose a prohibition for a specified period of not more 
than three years against measures without prior permission which 
would affect the area or object and conflict with the purpose of the 
intended protection. In special circumstances the prohibition may 
be extended for a period of not more than one year. In exceptional 


--- PAGE 36 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
44
circumstances the prohibition may be extended for not more than 
one additional year thereafter. 
A prohibition imposed pursuant to the first paragraph shall take 
effect immediately even if it is appealed against. 
Review of interests 
Section 25 
In connection with the consideration of matters 
relating to protected areas referred to in this chapter, private 
interests shall also be taken into account. Restrictions on the rights 
of private individuals to use land or water under safeguard clauses 
provided in this chapter must therefore not be more stringent than 
is necessary in order to achieve the purpose of the protection. 
 
Section 26 
Exemptions from prohibitions or other rules 
issued pursuant to this chapter may only be granted in accordance 
with sections 7, 9 to 11, 18, 20 and 22 where this is consistent with 
the purpose of the prohibition or rule. 
List of areas of unspoiled nature 
Section 27  
The Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government shall continuously keep a list of areas of unspoiled 
nature for which protection is to be provided in accordance with 
international undertakings or national objectives relating to the 
protection of such areas. The list shall specify the international 
undertaking or national objective that justifies inclusion of the area 
in the list. 
The areas included in the list shall be given priority in future 
protection measures. 
Special protection areas and special areas of conservation 
Section 28  
The Government may designate an area of 
unspoiled nature as a special protection area if, in accordance with 
Council Directive 79/409/EEC of 2 April 1979 on the conservation 
of wild birds, as last amended by Commission Directive 97/49/EC, 
the area is particularly important for the protection of such birds. 
An area that is recognized as an area of Community interest by 
the Commission of the European Communities shall be designated 


--- PAGE 37 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
45
a special area of conservation by the Government pursuant to 
Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation 
of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora, as last amended by 
Council Directive 97/62/EC. 
The Government may, following consultation with the 
Commission, cancel a designation referred to in the first or the 
second paragraph if the area’s natural assets no longer justify the 
designation. 
 
Section 29  
A decision to withdraw, wholly or in part, 
protection from an area designated a special protection area or a 
special area of conservation, to grant an exemption from safeguard 
measures or to grant a permit under such measures must not be 
taken without permission from the Government. 
This shall not apply to decisions granting an exemption or a 
permit where it is clear that the activity will not cause more than 
minor damage to the area’s natural assets. 
Bylaws 
Section 30  
Bylaws relating to the right to travel and be in an 
area protected by the provisions of this chapter and to other 
matters of order in the area may be issued by the Government or 
the authority appointed by the Government if this is necessary in 
order to achieve the purpose of protection. A municipality may 
issue such rules if it decides to establish a protection area. 
The bylaws shall take effect immediately even if they are 
appealed against. 
Delegation of powers to municipalities 
Section 31 
The Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government may decide that the powers invested in a county 
administrative board pursuant to section 18 shall be delegated to a 
municipality. 
 


--- PAGE 38 ---

 
47
Chapter 8. Special provisions concerning the protection of 
animal and plant species 
Section 1 
Rules prohibiting the killing, injury or capture of 
wild animals or the taking of or causing of damage to the eggs, 
spawn, roe or nests of such animals in the country or any part of it 
may be issued by the Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government. Such rules may be issued where there is a risk of a 
wild animal species becoming extinct or being subjected to 
exploitation or where they are necessary for compliance with 
Sweden’s international undertakings with respect to the protection 
of such a species. Nevertheless, these prohibitions shall not apply 
in cases where such an animal must be killed, injured or captured in 
order to defend a person or valuable property against attack. 
 
Special provisions shall apply to the killing or capture of wild 
animals of certain species where such an act takes place in 
connection with hunting or fishing. 
 
Section 2 
Rules prohibiting the removal of, the causing of 
damage to or the taking of seeds or other parts from wild plants in 
the country or any part of it may be issued by the Government or 
the authority appointed by the Government. Such rules may be 
issued where there is a risk of a wild plant species becoming extinct 
or being subjected to exploitation, or where it is necessary for 
compliance with Sweden’s international undertakings with respect 
to the protection of such a species. 
 
Section 3  
In order to protect wild animal or plant species or 
the natural environment, the Government or the authority 
appointed by the Government may issue rules prohibiting, or 
special conditions concerning, the release of specimens of animal 
or plant species into the natural environment. 
 
This shall not apply where such regulations exist in other 
legislation. 
 
Provisions relating to genetically modified organisms are 
contained in chapter 13. 
 
Section 4  
In order to protect wild animal or plant species, 
the Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules concerning imports and exports, transportation, 


--- PAGE 39 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
48
housing, preparation and exhibition of, or trade in, animals and 
plants. Such rules may be issued where they are necessary for 
compliance with Sweden’s international undertakings in that area 
or for other reasons. The rules may also govern any corresponding 
dealing with eggs, spawn, roe or nests or with other products 
extracted from animals or plants. 
 
The rules may impose prohibitions against, or the 
requirement to obtain a permit for, or other special conditions 
relating to, the measures referred to in the first paragraph. 
 
Section 5 
Any rules issued or decisions taken in individual 
cases pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall take effect 
immediately even if they are appealed against. 
 


--- PAGE 40 ---

 
49
PART THREE 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING CERTAIN ACTIVITIES 
Chapter 9. Environmentally hazardous activities and health 
protection 
Definitions 
Section 1 
‘Environmentally hazardous activities’ shall mean: 
1. the discharge of wastewater, solid matter or gas from land, 
buildings or structures onto land or into water areas or 
groundwater; 
2. any use of land, buildings or structures that entails a risk of 
detriment to human health or the environment due to discharges 
or emissions other than those referred to in point 1 or to pollution 
of land, air, water areas or groundwater; or 
3. any use of land, buildings or structures that may cause a 
detriment to the surroundings due to noise, vibration, light, 
ionizing or non-ionizing radiation or similar impact. 
 
Section 2 
‘Wastewater’ shall mean: 
1. discharge water, sewage or other liquid impurities; 
2. water used for cooling; 
3. water that is diverted for the purpose of draining land 
included in a detailed development plan, where drainage is not 
carried out for the benefit of a specific property or properties; or 
4. water that is diverted for the purpose of draining a burial 
ground. 
 
Section 3 
‘Detriment to human health’ shall mean any 
disturbance that is liable to have adverse effects on health in 
medical or hygienic terms which are not minor or temporary. 
 
 


--- PAGE 41 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
50
General provisions concerning environmentally hazardous 
activities and health protection 
Section 4  
Where special reasons exist on account of the 
need to protect human health or the environment, the Government 
may issue rules or decisions for a certain part of the country 
prohibiting: 
1. the discharge of wastewater, solid matter or gas from land, 
buildings or structures; or 
2. the depositing of solid matter. 
This shall be applicable where such activities may lead to 
pollution or adverse impact on water areas, land or groundwater. 
 
Section 5  
In order to protect human health or the 
environment, the Government may, where this appears more 
appropriate than issuing decisions in individual cases, issue rules in 
cases other than those referred to in section 4 laying down 
prohibitions, 
protective 
measures, 
restrictions 
and 
other 
precautions relating to environmentally hazardous activities. Such 
rules may also be issued for the purposes of compliance with 
Sweden’s international undertakings. In special circumstances the 
Government may authorize an authority to issue such rules. 
Where necessary, the Government may issue rules requiring 
precautions to be taken that go beyond the scope of Sweden’s 
obligations as a Member State of the European Union or of its 
international undertakings. 
Permit and notification requirements for environmentally 
hazardous activities 
Section 6  
The Government may provide that the following 
activities may not be undertaken without prior permission or 
notification: 
1. the building or operation of certain kinds of factories, other 
facilities or other environmentally hazardous activities; 
2. the discharge of wastewater onto land or into water areas or 
groundwater; 
3. the discharge or depositing of solid waste or other solid 
matter where this is liable to pollute land, water areas or 
groundwater; and 


--- PAGE 42 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
51
4. environmentally hazardous activities referred to in points 1-3 
where the production or treatment process or other parameters are 
modified, provided that the changes are not minor. 
Even where a permit is not required pursuant to the first 
paragraph, the supervisory authority may in individual cases order 
an operator to apply for a permit where the activity involves the 
risk of significant pollution or other significant detriment to 
human health or the environment. 
Persons who pursue or intend to pursue an environmentally 
hazardous activity may apply for a permit for the activity in 
accordance with this Code even where such a permit is not 
compulsory. 
 
Section 7  
Wastewater shall be diverted and purified or 
treated in some other way in order to avoid detriment to human 
health or the environment. Appropriate sewerage systems or other 
works shall be established for this purpose. 
The Government may issue rules prohibiting the establishment 
or alteration of such sewerage systems or other works without 
prior permission or notification. 
The Government may delegate the issuance of rules referred to 
in the second paragraph to a municipality. 
 
Section 8  
Applications for permits for environmentally 
hazardous activities shall be considered by environmental courts. 
The Government may provide that applications for permits for 
certain kinds of activities shall be considered by county 
administrative boards. If an environmentally hazardous activity is 
likely to have little environmental impact, the Government may 
provide that the permit application shall be considered by a 
municipal committee. Permit applications relating to the Swedish 
Armed Forces, the National Fortifications Administration, the 
Defence Matériel Administration or the National Defence Radio 
Centre shall always be considered by a county administrative 
board. 
Notification of environmentally hazardous activities shall be 
made to the Surgeon-General of the Swedish Armed Forces or the 
municipality or county administrative board concerned in 
accordance with the Government’s instructions. 
 


--- PAGE 43 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
52
Special provisions concerning health protection 
Section 9  
Dwellings and public premises shall be used in 
such a way as to prevent detriment to human health and shall be 
kept free of vermin and other pests. 
The owners or tenants of the property in question shall take any 
measures that may be reasonably required to prevent or eliminate 
detriment to human health. 
 
Section 10  
Groundwater 
collection 
structures 
shall 
be 
established and used in such a way as to ensure that detriment is 
not caused to human health. 
If a permit is not required pursuant to chapter 11, the 
municipality may require that a permit must nevertheless be 
obtained from or prior notification submitted to the municipality 
before a new groundwater collection structure is established and 
used in an area where there is a scarcity of fresh groundwater or a 
risk of scarcity in the future. This shall apply where necessary in 
order to prevent detriment to human health. The municipality may 
also require notification to be submitted of existing structures in 
specified areas. 
 
Section 11  
The Government may provide that certain animals 
must not be kept without a permit from the municipality in areas 
included in detailed development plans or area regulations where 
such rules are necessary in order to prevent detriment to human 
health. 
The Government may delegate the issuance of such rules to a 
municipality. 
 
Section 12  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue any rules that are necessary for the 
purposes of health protection in cases other than those mentioned 
in sections 10 and 11. The Government may delegate the issuance 
of such rules to the municipality. 
Rules issued pursuant to the first paragraph may stipulate that 
activities which are liable to cause damage or detriment to human 
health must not be pursued or that certain structures must not be 
established without prior permission from or notification to the 
municipality. 
 


--- PAGE 44 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
53
Section 13 
Municipal rules that are issued for the purpose of 
protection against detriment to human health must not involve 
unnecessary coercion of the public or any other unjustified 
restriction on individual freedom. 
 


--- PAGE 45 ---

 
55
Chapter 10. Polluted areas 
Responsibility for investigation and after-treatment 
Section 1 
This chapter shall be applicable to land and water 
areas, buildings and structures that are so polluted that they may 
cause damage or detriment to human health or the environment. 
 
Section 2 
Persons who pursue or have pursued an activity or 
taken a measure that is a contributory cause of the pollution 
(operators) shall be liable for the after-treatment of areas, buildings 
and structures referred to in section 1. 
 
Section 3  
If an operator is not able to carry out or pay for 
the after-treatment of a polluted property, the person who 
acquired the property and was aware of the pollution at the time of 
acquisition or ought to have detected it then shall be liable for 
after-treatment. If the property acquired is a private residential 
property within the meaning of chapter 2, section 13 of the Income 
Tax Act (1999:1229), only an acquirer who was aware of the 
pollution shall be liable. In the case of a polluted building or 
structure, the same shall apply to the person who acquired the 
property on which the building or structure is situated. Acquisition 
of a land leasehold shall be regarded as acquisition of property. 
The first paragraph shall not be applicable where a bank acquires 
a property in order to protect a claim pursuant to chapter 2, section 
8 of the Banking Act (1987:617). (Law 1999:1231) 
 
Section 4  
After-treatment liability shall mean that the 
person who is liable for after-treatment shall, to the extent 
reasonable, carry out or pay for any after-treatment measures that 
are necessary in order to prevent or combat subsequent damage or 
detriment to human health or the environment. When the extent of 
liability is determined, account shall be taken of the length of time 
that has elapsed since the pollution occurred, whether the person 
liable was obliged to prevent future damage and any other relevant 
circumstances. Where an operator can show that he was only 
responsible for the pollution to a limited extent, this shall also be 


--- PAGE 46 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
56
taken into account in connection with determination of the extent 
of liability. 
The Limitation of Claims Act (1981:130) shall not be applicable 
to liability for after-treatment. 
 
Section 5 
The owner of a property that is after-treated may, 
despite the fact that he is not liable under section 2 or section 3, be 
obliged to the extent reasonable to bear the costs corresponding to 
the rise in value of the property as a result of after-treatment. 
 
Section 6  
If several operators are liable in accordance with 
section 2, they shall accept joint and several liability to the extent 
that the liability is not limited in accordance with section 4 first 
paragraph. An operator who shows that his or her responsibility 
for the pollution is so insignificant that it does not by itself justify 
after-treatment shall, however, only be liable to the extent that 
corresponds to his share of responsibility. 
The payment made by the liable persons shall be shared between 
them as appears reasonable with regard to the extent to which each 
of them was responsible for the pollution and to other relevant 
circumstances. 
 
Section 7 
If several property owners or land leaseholders are 
liable pursuant to section 3, they shall accept joint and several 
liability to the extent that the liability is not limited in accordance 
with section 4 first paragraph.  
The payment made by the liable persons shall be shared between 
them as appears reasonable with regard to their knowledge of the 
circumstances at the time of the acquisition and to other relevant 
circumstances. 
 
Section 8  
Sections 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 shall be applicable to 
liability for the cost of investigating pollution in land and water 
areas, buildings and structures referred to in section 1. 
The owner of a property, building or structure referred to in the 
first paragraph may be obliged, even though he is not liable under 
section 2 or section 3, to bear to the extent reasonable the costs of 
investigation in consideration of the benefit that he is likely to 
derive from the investigation, his financial situation and any other 
relevant circumstances. 


--- PAGE 47 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
57
Compulsory notification 
Section 9 
Regardless of whether or not the area was 
previously deemed to be polluted, the owner or user of a property 
shall immediately notify the supervisory authority where any 
pollution is discovered on the property that may cause damage or 
detriment to human health or the environment. 
Environmental hazard zones 
Section 10 
County administrative boards shall by decision 
declare a land or water area an environmental hazard zone if it is so 
seriously polluted that it is necessary, in view of the risks to human 
health or the environment, to impose restrictions on the use of the 
land or to prescribe other precautions. The danger to human health 
or the environment of the pollution, its degree, the likelihood of its 
spreading and the vulnerability of the surrounding environment 
shall be taken into account when a decision is taken concerning 
such a declaration. 
 
Section 11 
A county administrative board may order any 
person liable pursuant to section 8 to submit, subject to a penalty 
of a fine, any investigation that is needed for the purposes of the 
permit application procedure. The injunction issued by the county 
administrative board may require that access must be given to the 
area for the purposes of after-treatment in accordance with chapter 
28, section 5. The county administrative board may also cause 
necessary investigations to be performed at the expense of the 
person who is liable. 
 
Section 12  
When an area is declared an environmental hazard 
zone, the county administrative board shall impose restrictions on 
the use of the land or attach conditions to certain measures that 
property owners or others wish to take or require that the 
supervisory authority be notified thereof. 
The restrictions and the notification requirement mentioned in 
the first paragraph may relate to digging, excavation and 
earthworks, development, other land use and other measures which 
may cause: 
- an increase in the input of pollutants into the area and the 
surrounding land; 


--- PAGE 48 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
58
- any other deterioration of the environmental situation; or 
- difficulties for future after-treatment measures. 
The county administrative board may also decide that such 
measures must not be taken or that a property must not be 
transferred until the necessary site investigations have been 
performed. 
 
Section 13 
The county administrative board shall alter or 
issue new conditions, or cancel the decision to declare an area an 
environmental hazard zone when it has been after-treated r when 
the pollution there has diminished for some other reason so that 
the restrictions imposed on the use of the land or other 
precautionary measures are no longer necessary. 
 
Section 14 
The Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government may issue further rules relating to environmental 
hazard zones. 
 


--- PAGE 49 ---

 
59
Chapter 11. Water operations 
Content of the chapter 
Section 1 
This chapter contains provisions relating to water 
operations and water structures. Provisions relating to water 
operations and water structures are also contained in chapter 6, 
section 5 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions 
concerning Water Operations. 
Definitions 
Section 2 
‘Water operations’ shall mean: 
1. the construction, alteration, repair and removal of dams or 
other water structures in water areas, filling and piling in water 
areas, the removal of water from or digging, blasting and cleansing 
in water areas, as well as other measures in water areas whose 
purpose is to change the depth or position of the water; 
2. the diversion of groundwater and the erection of structures 
for this purpose; 
3. recharging in order to increase the volume of groundwater, as 
well as the erection of structures and other measures for this 
purpose; and 
4. measures undertaken to drain land, except for the purpose of 
diverting wastewater or measures to lower or empty a water area or 
to provide protection against water where the purpose is to 
increase permanently the suitability of a property for a certain 
purpose (land drainage). 
 
Section 3 
A ‘water structure’ shall mean a structure erected 
for the purpose of water operations, together with the control 
devices associated with the structure. 
 
Section 4 
A ‘water area’ shall mean an area that is covered 
with water at the highest anticipated water level. 
 


--- PAGE 50 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
60
Section 5  
‘Water catchment’ shall mean the removal of 
surface water or groundwater for the purposes of water supply, 
heat generation or irrigation. 
‘Water regulation’ shall mean manipulation of the flow of a 
watercourse for the purposes of other water operations. 
‘Diversion of water’ shall mean water regulation performed by 
transferring surface water from one water area to another. 
Special conditions applying to water operations 
Section 6  
Water operations may only be undertaken if the 
benefits from the point of view of public and private interests are 
greater than the costs and damage associated with them. 
Further provisions relating to certain water structures are 
contained in sections 19 and 20 of the Electricity Preparedness Act 
(1997:228). 
 
Section 7 
Water operations shall be implemented in such a 
way as not to be prejudicial to other activities which are likely to 
involve the same water source in the future and which serve 
important public or private purposes. This requirement shall apply 
where the operations can be implemented in such a manner 
without unreasonable expense. 
 
Section 8  
Persons who intend to carry on water operations 
that may be detrimental to fishing must, at their own expense, 
make and in future maintain any arrangements that are necessary 
for the passage of fish or the sustainability of fishing, supply water 
for this purpose and comply with any other conditions that may be 
necessary in the context of the operations to protect fishing in the 
water in which the water operations are carried on or in adjacent 
water areas. If the benefit of a disputed installation or a condition 
cannot reasonably be considered to justify the expense incurred by 
the operator for compliance, the operator may be discharged from 
such an obligation. 
The provisions of this section relating to fish shall also apply to 
aquatic molluscs and crustaceans. 
Provisions under which fishing fees may be charged instead of 
the imposition of conditions pursuant to subsection (1) are 
contained in chapter 6, section 5 of the Act (1998:812) Containing 
Special Provisions concerning Water Operations. 


--- PAGE 51 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
61
Permit requirement for water operations 
Section 9  
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a permit 
must be obtained for water operations within the meaning of this 
Code. Applications for water operation permits shall be considered 
by the environmental courts. However, applications for land 
drainage permits shall be considered by county administrative 
boards unless they must be considered by the environmental courts 
pursuant to chapter 7, sections 19 and 20 of the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations. 
Persons who wish to carry on water operations may apply for a 
permit even where a permit is not required for such operations 
Provisions pursuant to which a permit must be applied for 
before a groundwater diversion structure is closed are contained in 
section 23. 
 
Section 10 
If a permit for water operations is required, large-
scale works connected with the operations must not commence 
until the permit is granted. 
 
Section 11 
A permit referred to in this chapter shall not be 
required for: 
1. water catchments for the personal consumption or heat supply 
of a one- or two-family property or agricultural and forestry 
property; 
2. the erection of structures for the breeding of fish, mussels or 
crustaceans; or 
3. the erection of structures for heat generation not related to 
water catchments. 
 
Section 12 
Permits referred to in this Code shall not be 
required where public or private interests are manifestly not 
harmed by the impact of water operations on water conditions. 
It follows from section 13 that the first paragraph does not apply 
to land drainage or, where the Government so requires, to other 
measures taken for the purpose of draining land. 
 
Section 13  
Land drainage must not be carried out without a 
permit. Furthermore, a permit shall be required, to the extent 
required by the Government, for other measures taken to drain 
land where such measures are likely to have a permanent adverse 
effect on flora and fauna. 


--- PAGE 52 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
62
However, a permit shall only be required for drainage of 
agricultural land with drain pipes having a maximum diameter of 
300 millimetres if the activity is likely to be detrimental to public 
or private interests. 
Permits for land drainage or other measures to drain land shall 
be made subject to any conditions that are necessary to limit or 
combat damage to public or private interests. A time limit for 
completion of the measures shall be specified in the permit. 
Permits referred to in this Code shall not be required for land 
drainage in connection with peat extraction for which a licence has 
been granted in accordance with the Certain Peat Deposits Act 
(1985:620). 
 
Section 14  
The Government may prohibit land drainage for 
which a permit would be required pursuant to this chapter in areas 
where the conservation of wetlands is particularly desirable. 
In special circumstances, county administrative boards may 
grant exemptions from prohibitions imposed pursuant to the first 
paragraph. 
If an exemption is granted pursuant to the second paragraph, a 
permit for land drainage must be applied for in accordance with 
section 9. A decision granting an exemption shall cease to be valid 
if a permit for land drainage is granted. 
 
Section 15 
A permit referred to in this chapter shall not be 
required for cleansing operations for the purpose of maintaining 
the depth or position of the water or immediately restoring a 
watercourse that has moved from its previous position or 
otherwise changed its course. 
If the works affect a property belonging to another, the owner 
shall always be notified before work commences. 
Notification of the contemplated works must be made to the 
county administrative board prior to commencement if they may 
be detrimental to fishing. 
 
Section 16  
Work may commence without prior permission if 
it is necessary, due to damage or the need to prevent damage, to 
without delay carry out alterations or repairs for which a permit is 
required. However, an application for approval of the operations 
shall be submitted as soon as possible. 
Measures contrary to the provisions concerning the storage and 
release of water may be undertaken without prior permission where 


--- PAGE 53 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
63
this is necessary in order to avert danger to life or health, to save 
valuable property or for similar reasons. However, an application 
for approval of the measures shall be submitted as soon as possible. 
Responsibility for maintenance 
Section 17  
Owners of water structures shall maintain them in 
such a way as to prevent damage being caused to public or private 
interests by changes in water conditions. If the structure was built 
on another’s land by virtue of a special right, and ownership of the 
structure is transferred to the landowner following expiry of that 
right, the previous rightholder shall continue to be responsible for 
maintenance. 
Persons who are granted the right to use another’s water 
structure pursuant to chapter 28, section 12 shall be responsible for 
maintaining the structure together with the owner, unless an 
environmental court rules otherwise. 
Sections 20 and 21 and chapter 24, section 4 second paragraph 
contain provisions concerning transfer of the maintenance 
responsibility. 
 
Section 18  
Persons who are responsible for maintaining a 
dam for water regulation shall pay compensation for damage 
caused by the failure of the dam to give the intended protection 
against escaping water (dam damage). This shall apply even where 
the damage is not caused either by the person responsible for 
maintenance or by a person for whom the former is responsible. 
Nevertheless, where a person responsible for maintenance shows 
that the dam damage was caused by an act of war or similar act in 
connection with an armed conflict, civil war or riots, he shall not be 
held responsible. 
Removal etc. 
Section 19 
Permission pursuant to the provisions of this 
Code shall always be granted for the removal of a surface water 
structure unless an order is issued pursuant to section 20. 
 
Section 20  
Instead of granting permission to remove a 
surface water structure the environmental court may, at the request 


--- PAGE 54 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
64
of the owner of a property which would be damaged by the 
removal, order that the responsibility for maintaining the structure 
and discharging any other obligations of the owner of the structure 
shall be transferred to the owner of the property until further 
notice. 
Following an undertaking to comply, such an order may also be 
issued to the state, a municipality or a water management 
association in order to safeguard public interests. 
No order shall be issued if the owner of the property is not 
likely to be able to discharge his obligations or if, with regard to 
the applicant or to public interests, it appears more appropriate to 
remove the structure. 
If the owner of a water structure suffers loss on account of its 
retention, the person who assumes responsibility for the structure 
shall pay reasonable compensation for the loss. 
 
Section 21  
If a property is transferred to a new owner, and 
the previous owner is responsible pursuant to section 20 first 
paragraph for maintaining the structure following the transfer, the 
new owner shall discharge the obligations associated with the 
transfer. 
Transfers pursuant to section 20 first paragraph shall be recorded 
in the real estate register. (Law 2000:228) 
 
Section 22  
If the closure, wholly or in part, of a groundwater 
diversion structure entails risks for public or private interests, the 
owner of the structure shall obtain permission from the 
environmental court. 
Reasonable compensation shall be paid if such a measure causes 
damage to another’s property due to a permanent change in water 
conditions. 
Water operations that have been examined elsewhere 
Section 23 
Permission shall be granted for the following 
types of water operations, subject to the provisions of chapter 2, 
section 9: 
1. water operations imposed as a condition for carrying on the 
operations in a decision concerning other operations pursuant to 
chapter 17, section 1 or section 3; 


--- PAGE 55 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
65
2. the construction of bridges and other water operations 
connected with roads, railways, underground railways or tramways, 
the construction of which has been examined separately; 
3. the laying of pipelines in water for which a licence has been 
granted pursuant to the Certain Pipelines Act (1978:160); 
4. operations for which a quarrying licence has been granted 
pursuant to the Certain Peat Deposits Act (1985:620), 
5. the laying of natural gas pipes in water for which a licence has 
been granted pursuant to the Natural Gas Act (2000:599). (Law 
2000:600). 
 


--- PAGE 56 ---

 
67
Chapter 12. Quarries, agriculture and other activities 
Quarries 
Section 1  
A permit must be obtained from the county 
administrative board for the quarrying of rock, stone, gravel, sand, 
clay, soil, peat or other types of soil. Nevertheless, landowners may 
take such measures without a permit for their own personal use, 
subject to rules issued pursuant to the second paragraph. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may provide that measures referred to in the first paragraph for the 
personal use of the landowner must not be taken without 
permission. The duty to obtain a permit pursuant to this 
subsection may be imposed if the measures are likely to be 
inconsistent with sound management of the natural resources 
mentioned in the first paragraph or to cause damage to the 
environment that is not inconsiderable. 
The first and second paragraph shall not apply to: 
1. measures in water areas for which a permit is required 
pursuant to chapter 11; 
2. measures for which a permit is required in accordance with the 
Continental Shelf Act (1966:314); or 
3. qyarrying of peat for which a processing licence has been 
granted pursuant to the Certain Peat Deposits Act (1985:620). 
 
Section 2  
In 
connection 
with 
the 
consideration 
of 
applications for quarrying permits, the demand for the material to 
be extracted shall be balanced against the damage that the 
quarrying is likely to cause to wild flora and fauna and the 
environment in general. A permit must not be granted for a 
quarrying operation that is likely to be detrimental to the habitat of 
any endangered, rare or care-demanding animal or plant species. 
The need of cultivable agricultural land shall be taken into 
account in connection with the consideration of applications for 
permits for the quarrying of topsoil. 
 
Section 3 
Quarrying permits may only be granted if a 
security is furnished for fulfilment of the conditions attached to 


--- PAGE 57 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
68
the permit. In special circumstances, the county administrative 
board may waive the requirement to furnish a security. Further 
provisions relating to securities are contained in chapter 16, section 
3. 
 
Section 4 
The owners or other possessors of the land shall 
accept any measures that are carried out in accordance with the 
conditions attached to the quarrying permit. 
 
Section 5  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules to the effect that operators of 
quarries for which a permit is required pursuant to this Code or to 
rules issued in pursuance thereof or operators of stone-crushing 
plants shall supply any information about the operations that may 
be required as guidance for nature conservation planning. 
The Government may require holders of quarrying permits 
referred to in the first paragraph to notify the county 
administrative board of the name of the quarry operator. 
Where the operator of a quarry for which a permit has been 
granted is not known, the holder of the permit shall be deemed to 
be the operator for the purposes of application of this section and 
of any rules issued in pursuance thereof. 
Notice of consultation 
Section 6  
If an activity or measure for which a permit or 
notification is not required pursuant to other provisions of this 
Code is liable to have a significant impact on the natural 
environment, notice of consultation shall be made to the 
supervisory authority in accordance with the provisions of chapter 
26 or with rules issued in pursuance thereof. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules to the effect that notice of consultation shall always 
be given, at national or local level, in the case of activities or 
measures that may damage the natural environment. The 
Government or the authority appointed by the Government may 
also issue rules specifying the information to be supplied in such a 
notice. 
Activities or measures which must be notified for consultation 
may not commence earlier than six weeks after submission of the 
notice unless the supervisory authority decides otherwise. 


--- PAGE 58 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
69
The authority referred to in the first paragraph may order 
persons who are required to submit a notice of consultation to take 
any measures that are necessary to limit or combat damage to the 
natural environment. If such measures are not sufficient the 
authority may, where necessary in order to protect the natural 
environment, prohibit the activity. Provisions concerning the right 
to compensation in the case of such an injunction or prohibition 
are contained in chapter 31. 
Environmental concerns in agriculture 
Section 7 
For the purposes of sections 8 and 9 ‘agricultural 
land’ shall mean arable and grazing land belonging to a property 
that is taxed as an agricultural holding. However, the provisions of 
those sections shall not apply to agricultural land: 
1. which belongs to a property that was established for purposes 
other than agriculture and has subsequently not been taxed; or 
2. which is designated for purposes other than agriculture in 
detailed development plans or area regulations pursuant to the 
Planning and Building Act (1987:10). 
 
Section 8 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules to the effect that natural and 
cultural assets must be treated with care and consideration in 
connection with the management of agricultural land and with 
other agricultural land use, such as protection of the agricultural 
and cultural landscape and of flora and fauna. However, these rules 
must not be so intrusive as to create significant difficulties for 
current land use in the relevant part of the property. 
 
Section 9  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may provide that agricultural land may only be 
withdrawn from agricultural production upon notification to the 
county administrative board, unless the measure is of little 
significance for agriculture on the holding or for the natural and 
cultural environment. 
The first paragraph shall not apply to land that is used for 
activities whose permissibility has been considered separately. 
 


--- PAGE 59 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
70
Section 10 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue any rules that may be appropriate for 
the purposes of environmental protection regarding: 
1. limitation of the number of animals on a holding; 
2. precautions in connection with manure management; and  
3. crop husbandry. 
Game enclosures 
Section 11  
Game enclosures must not be set up without 
permission from the county administrative board in areas where 
the public has unrestricted right of access. 
The need to protect outdoor recreation facilities and the natural 
environment shall be taken into account in connection with the 
consideration of permit applications. 
Permission for game enclosures in a shore protection area may 
only be granted in special circumstances. 
Provisions concerning permit requirements 
Section 12 
The Government may require permits to be 
obtained for activities or measures wherever necessary in 
consequence of Sweden’s membership of the European Union. 
 


--- PAGE 60 ---

 
71
Chapter 13. Genetic engineering 
Area of application 
Section 1  
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable 
to contained use and deliberate release of genetically modified 
organisms. The provisions shall also be applicable where products 
containing or consisting of such organisms are placed on the 
market. 
The purpose of these provisions is, in addition to that set forth 
in chapter 1, section 1 first paragraph, to ensure that special 
attention is paid to ethical concerns in connection with activities 
referred to in the first paragraph. 
 
Section 2 
The Government may issue rules allowing 
exemptions from the applicability of this chapter in the case of 
organisms resulting from the use of tried and tested genetic 
modification methods that are known not to involve any risks in 
terms of health and the environment. 
Definitions 
Section 3 
An ‘organism’ shall mean a biological entity 
capable of replication or of transferring genetic material. 
 
Section 4 
A ‘genetically modified organism’ shall mean an 
organism in which the genetic material has been altered in a way 
that does not occur naturally by mating or natural recombination. 
 
Section 5 
‘Contained use’ shall mean an activity in which 
organisms are genetically modified, cultured, stored, used, 
transported, destroyed, disposed of or used in any other way, and 
for which  specific containment measures are used to limit their 
contact with the general population and the environment. (Law 
2000:119) 
 


--- PAGE 61 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
72
Section 6 
‘Deliberate release’ shall mean any intentional 
introduction 
of 
genetically 
modified 
organisms 
into 
the 
environment without containment. 
 
Section 7 
The term ‘placing on the market’ shall mean 
supplying or making a product available to third parties. 
Compulsory investigations for the purpose of assessing the 
potential risk of damage 
Section 8 
An investigation shall be carried out prior to the 
contained use and deliberate release of genetically modified 
organisms. It shall constitute a proper basis for an acceptable 
assessment of the damage to health and the environment that the 
organisms are liable to cause. The investigation shall be made in 
accordance with scientific knowledge and proven experience. Such 
an investigation shall also be made before a product containing or 
consisting of genetically modified organisms is placed on the 
market. 
 
Section 9 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue further rules concerning investigations 
referred to in section 8. 
Ethical concerns and precautions 
Section 10 
Special attention shall be paid to ethical concerns 
in connection with the contained use and deliberate release of 
genetically modified organisms and the placing on the market of 
products containing or consisting of such organisms. 
 
Section 11 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue special rules concerning precautions. 
Permit and notification requirements 
Section 12 
A permit shall be obtained for the deliberate 
release of genetically modified organisms or the placing on the 
market of products containing or consisting of such organisms. 
 


--- PAGE 62 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
73
Section 13 
A permit shall only be granted if the activity is 
justifiable on ethical grounds. 
 
Section 14 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules concerning the precautions that 
must be taken to protect human health or the environment before 
a permit referred to in section 12 can be granted. 
 
Section 15 
The Government or the licensing authority may 
issue rules concerning exemptions from the permit requirement 
laid down in section 12. 
 
Section 16 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules concerning permit or notification 
requirements for contained use of genetically modified organisms 
if this is necessary for health or environmental reasons. 
 
Section 17  
Permit applications and notifications shall be 
submitted to the authority appointed by the Government. 
Permit applications shall be processed within the time limit 
decided by the Government. 
Permits shall be valid for five years unless otherwise stated in the 
relevant decision. 
Labelling 
Section 18 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may require any person who places a product 
containing or consisting of genetically modified organisms on the 
market to label it. 
The Swedish Gene Technology Advisory Board 
Section 19  
A special board, the Swedish Gene Technology 
Advisory 
Board, 
shall 
monitor 
developments 
in 
genetic 
engineering, review ethical issues and give advice on the uses of 
genetic engineering. 
The Government shall issue provisions establishing the functions 
of the Swedish Gene Technology Advisory Board and its 
composition and working arrangements. 


--- PAGE 63 ---

 
75
Chapter 14. Chemical products and biotechnical organisms 
Area of application 
 
Section 1  
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable 
to chemical products and biotechnical organisms. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may provide that the provisions of this Code that relate to 
chemical products shall be applicable to products that contain or 
are treated with a chemical product if there is a risk that such 
products may, on account of their characteristics, be prejudicial to 
human health or the environment or to other interests that are 
protected by this Code. 
Definitions 
Section 2 
A ‘chemical product’ shall mean a chemical 
substance or a preparation of chemical substances. 
 
Section 3 
A ‘biotechnical organism’ shall mean a product 
that is produced specifically as a control agent or for any other 
technical purpose and which, wholly or in part, consists of or 
contains living microorganisms, including viruses, or nematodes, 
insects or arachnids. 
 
Section 4 
The 
‘handling’ 
of 
chemical 
products 
or 
biotechnical organisms shall mean any activity or measure 
involving manufacture, processing, treatment, packaging, storage, 
transport, use, disposal, destruction, processing, sale, transfer and 
similar procedures. 
 
Section 5  
A ‘chemical pesticide’ shall mean a chemical 
product that is intended to prevent or deter animals, plants or 
microorganisms, including viruses, from causing damage or 
detriment to human health or damage to property. (Law 2000:119) 
 


--- PAGE 64 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
76
Section 6 
A ‘biological pesticide’ shall mean a biotechnical 
organism that is produced specifically to prevent or deter animals, 
plants or microorganisms, including viruses, from causing damage 
or detriment to human health or damage to property. 
Environment and health impact assessments 
Section 7 
Manufacturers 
and 
importers 
of 
chemical 
products or biotechnical organisms shall ensure that an appropriate 
investigation is carried out as a basis for assessment of the damage 
to human health or the environment that the product or organism 
is liable to cause. The investigation shall be carried out in 
accordance with scientific knowledge and proven experience. It 
shall include an assessment of the characteristics of the product in 
terms of health and environmental protection and shall specify: 
1. the substances or organisms to which the dangerous 
characteristics of the product or organism are attributable; 
2. the nature and degree of the dangerous characteristics; 
3. any measures that are necessary in order to protect human 
health or the environment in connection with handling; and 
4. the measures that are necessary in connection with disposal of 
waste from the product or organism. 
Product information 
Section 8 
Manufacturers or importers of chemical products 
or biotechnical organisms or anyone who places such products or 
organisms on the market shall supply any information that is 
necessary in order to protect human health or the environment 
(product information) by labelling the products or by some other 
means. (Law 2000:119) 
Obligation to supply information 
Section 9 
Professional users, importers and exporters of 
chemical products or biotechnical organisms shall, to the extent 
required 
by 
the 
Government 
or, 
following 
government 
authorization, the authority appointed by the Government, supply 
that authority with any information about the products or 
organisms and their handling that may be necessary in order to 


--- PAGE 65 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
77
assess the health or environmental risks associated with the 
product or organism and its handling, importation or exportation. 
Product registers 
Section 10  
Chemical 
products 
that 
are 
professionally 
manufactured in or imported into Sweden shall be listed in a 
product register in accordance with the rules issued by the 
Government or the authority appointed by the Government. The 
register shall be kept by the authority appointed by the 
Government. 
The Government may require a corresponding product register 
to be kept for biotechnical organisms. 
Prior notification 
Section 11 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may require that persons who intend to 
manufacture or import a chemical product or biotechnical 
organism that has not previously been used in Sweden shall report 
any such manufacture or importation and present the results of 
relevant research and other information. Such reports shall be 
submitted to the authority appointed by the Government within 
the time limit decided by the Government or the authority. 
Permits 
Section 12 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules concerning permits for: 
1. imports of particularly dangerous chemical products and 
biotechnical organisms from countries that are not Member States 
of the European Union; 
2. professional distribution of particularly dangerous chemical 
products and biotechnical organisms; and 
3. other handling of particularly dangerous chemical products 
and biotechnical organisms. 
 
 


--- PAGE 66 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
78
Approval of pesticides 
Section 13 
Chemical or biological pesticides must not be 
imported from countries that are not Member States of the 
European Union or placed on the market or used without prior 
approval pursuant to section 14 from the Government or the 
authority appointed by the Government. 
 
Section 14  
Approval may be given if the pesticides is 
acceptable from the point of view of health and environmental 
protection and is needed for the control purposes referred to in 
section 5 or 6. 
Approval may also be given if the requirements are fulfilled in 
accordance with Council Directive 91/414/EEC of 15 July 1991 
concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market, 
as last amended by Commission Directive 1999/80/EC, or 
according to the European Parliament and the Council Directive 
98/8/EC of 16 February 1998 concerning the placing of biocidal 
products on the market. 
Approval may be granted for a period not exceeding five years. 
However, in special circumstances approval may be granted for a 
period not exceeding ten years. (Law 2000:119) 
 
Section 15 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules concerning approval of chemical 
and biological pesticides. (Law 2000:119) 
Authorization of exemptions 
Section 16  
In special circumstances, the Government or the 
authority appointed by the Government may grant exemptions 
from the permit or approval requirements laid down in sections 12 
to 15. In exceptional circumstances, the Government or the 
authority appointed by the Government may waive these 
requirements in individual cases. 
Such rules or decisions may require notification to be made 
before a chemical product or biotechnical organism is offered for 
sale or used. 
 


--- PAGE 67 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
79
Precautions in connection with the use of pesticides  
Section 17 
Chemical products or biotechnical organisms 
other than those approved for placing on the market and use as 
chemical or biological pesticides or exempted pursuant to sections 
13 to 16 may only be used as control agents where it is established 
that their use does not involve any risks to human health or the 
environment. 
Spreading of pesticides 
Section 18  
Chemical or biological pesticides shall be spread in 
such a way as not to damage human health or the environment or 
cause other detriment and to minimize the environmental impact. 
Measures shall be taken to prevent the pesticide being spread 
outside the designated area of spreading. 
Chemical or biological pesticides must not be spread from 
aircraft. In exceptional circumstances, the Government or the 
authority appointed by the Government may grant exemptions 
from this prohibition in individual cases. 
 
Section 19  
Chemical or biological pesticides used for the 
purpose of controlling deciduous brush must not be spread over 
forest land. Individual tree-trunks must not be treated with such 
agents. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may grant exemptions from this prohibition where necessary for 
scientific experiments. 
 
Section 20  
Unless otherwise is provided in the second 
paragraph, the authority appointed by the Government may grant 
exemptions from section 19, first paragraph, where the 
requirement imposed by section 6 of the Forest Conservation Act 
(1979:429) concerning forest regeneration cannot reasonably be 
satisfied by mechanical clearing methods. The situation and nature 
of the forest land, the composition of the forest stands, the effects 
of spreading on wildlife habitats and other public interests shall be 
taken into account in this connection. 
A municipality may decide not to grant an exemption pursuant 
to the first paragraph for an area within the municipality in view of 
the importance of the area for outdoor recreation, nature 


--- PAGE 68 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
80
conservation, the well-being of the local population or some other 
local interest. 
Provisions concerning fuels 
Section 21  
In order to combat emissions into the air of 
substances that may cause detriment to human health or the 
environment the Government may issue rules concerning fuels that 
relate to their quality and characteristics, combustion, trade, 
distribution or importation into Sweden. 
The Government may delegate the issuance of such rules to an 
authority or a municipality. 
 
Section 22 
Petrol for engine propulsion or heating purposes 
shall be graded and supplied by professional manufacturers or 
importers of such petrol in accordance with the environmental 
classes specified in Annex 1 to this Code. It is prohibited to offer 
for sale any petrol for engine propulsion falling under the CN code 
nos. 2710 00 27, 2710 00 29, 2710 00 32, 2710 00 34, 2710 00 36 
according to the EEC Regulation 2658/87, which does not comply 
with the environmental specifications of environmental class nr 2. 
Diesel fuel and paraffin which is intended for engine propulsion, 
with the exception of aviation kerosene, shall be graded and 
supplied by professional manufacturers or importers of such fuels 
in accordance with the environmental classes specified in Annex 2 
to this Code. It is prohibited to offer for sale any dies55 
55el fuel falling under CN code no.  2710 00 66 according to the 
EEC Regulation 2658/87, and intended to be used in motor 
vehicles referred to in Directive 70/220/EEC and Directive 
88/77/EEC, which does not comply with the environmental 
specifications of environmental class nr 3. (Law 1999:1325)  
Compulsory notification of adverse effects 
Section 23  
Manufacturers 
of 
a 
chemical 
product 
or 
biotechnical organism or anyone who places such product or 
organism on the market shall immediately notify the authority 
appointed by the Government of any new information that 
becomes available after the granting of a permit or approval which 
indicates that the chemical product or biotechnical organism or 


--- PAGE 69 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
81
residues of an active substance in the product or organism may 
have adverse effects on human health, groundwater or the 
environment in general. 
This duty to supply information shall also apply in the case of 
chemical products and biotechnical organisms that are not subject 
to permit or approval requirements where new information 
becomes available according to which the product or organism may 
have carcinogenic, mutagenic or reproduction-toxic properties that 
are liable to affect its classification or labelling. 
Authorization to issue additional rules concerning conditions, 
permit requirements or prohibitions etc. 
Section 24  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may, as regards the handling, importation and 
exportation of chemical products and biotechnical organisms, issue 
additional rules concerning matters referred to in sections 7, 8, 17, 
18 and 23 and chapter 2, sections 2, 3 and 6. The same shall apply 
to provisions that are necessary in consequence of Sweden’s 
membership of the European Union. 
Where it is necessary for reasons of health or environmental 
protection, the Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government may also, in cases other than those mentioned in 
sections 12 to 15 and 21: 
1. prohibit the handling, importation into Sweden or exportation 
out of Sweden of a chemical product or biotechnical organism 
without prior permission or approval; and 
2. lay down special conditions for the handling, importation or 
exportation of such products or organisms. 
 
Section 25 
Where it is of particular importance for reasons of 
health and the environment, the Government or the authority 
appointed by the Government may in cases other than those 
mentioned in this chapter prohibit the handling, importation and 
exportation of chemical products and biotechnical organisms. 
 


--- PAGE 70 ---

 
83
Chapter 15. Waste and producer responsibility 
Definitions 
Section 1  
‘Waste’ shall mean any object, matter or substance 
belonging to a specific waste category which the holder disposes of 
or intends or is required to dispose of. 
The Government shall issue rules concerning waste categories 
referred to in the first paragraph. 
 
Section 2 
‘Household waste’ shall mean waste generated by 
households and comparable waste from other sources. 
 
Section 3 
‘Waste management’ shall mean activities or 
measures involving the collection, transport, recycling and removal 
of waste. 
 
Section 4 
A ‘producer’ shall mean: 
1. a professional manufacturer, importer or vendor of a product 
or packaging; or 
2. a person whose professional activities generate waste which 
requires special measures with respect to waste disposal or the 
environment. 
 
Section 5 
For the purposes of this chapter ‘property owner’ 
shall mean the person who owns the property or who is deemed to 
be the owner pursuant to chapter 1, section 5 of the Property Tax 
Assessment Act (1979:1152). 
Producer responsibility 
Section 6 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules concerning the duty of producers 
to ensure that waste is collected, removed, recycled, reused or 
removed in a manner that satisfies the requirements for acceptable 
waste management in terms of health and the environment. Such 
rules may be issued with respect to waste from the articles or 


--- PAGE 71 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
84
packaging manufactured, imported into Sweden or sold by the 
producers and to waste generated by their activities. 
 
Section 7  
Rules issued pursuant to section 6 may also lay 
down requirements concerning the composition, reusability and 
recyclability of packaging. 
These rules may also require producers to: 
1. label products or packaging; 
2. supply any information that is relevant to producer 
responsibility concerning the substances and materials contained in 
products or packaging and concerning collection and reuse and 
recycling potential or other factors. 
Municipal waste collection and disposal obligation 
Section 8  
Unless other provision is made pursuant to 
section 6, municipalities shall ensure that: 
1. household waste generated in the municipality is transported 
to a waste treatment plant where necessary in order to protect 
human health and the environment and safeguard private interests; 
and 
2. household waste generated in the municipality is recycled or 
removed. 
When planning and deciding how to discharge this obligation, 
the municipality shall take into account the extent to which owners 
and tenants can dispose of household waste themselves in a manner 
that is acceptable in terms of protection of human health and the 
environment. In its planning and decisions the municipality shall 
also ensure that the removal of waste is appropriate to the needs of 
various built environments. 
Such plans and decisions shall define the conditions in which 
owners and tenants of properties may themselves dispose of 
household waste and, where rules issued pursuant to section 10 are 
applicable, any other waste generated on their premises. 
 
Section 9 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue detailed rules concerning waste 
disposal. The Government may delegate the issuance of such rules 
to municipalities. 
 


--- PAGE 72 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
85
Section 10  
Where it is necessary for reasons of human health 
or the environment, the Government may with respect to waste 
other than household waste generated in the municipality issue 
rules requiring: 
1. the municipality to arrange for removal of the waste; 
2. the municipality to ensure that the waste is recycled or 
disposed of. 
The above provisions shall not apply in cases where rules 
concerning producer responsibility are issued pursuant to section 
6. 
The Government may delegate the issuance of rules referred to 
in the first and the second paragraph to municipalities. 
Municipal waste management regulation 
Section 11  
All municipalities shall adopt a municipal waste 
management regulation which shall contain the rules on waste 
disposal that are applicable in the municipality and a waste disposal 
plan. The regime shall define the conditions referred to in section 8 
third paragraph. The waste disposal plan shall contain information 
concerning waste in the municipality and concerning the 
municipality’s measures to reduce the quantity and hazardousness 
of such waste. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules concerning the content of waste disposal plans. 
 
Section 12 
Where a decision concerning a municipal waste 
management regulation is to be taken by a municipality following 
government authorization, it shall be adopted by the municipal 
council. 
 
Section 13  
In connection with the preparation of a draft 
municipal waste management regulation, the municipality shall, by 
appropriate means and to the extent reasonable, consult any 
property owners and authorities that may have a substantial 
interest in the matter. 
Before the draft municipal waste management regulation is 
adopted, it shall be displayed for public scrutiny for a period of at 
least four weeks. 
 


--- PAGE 73 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
86
Section 14 
A notice announcing the display of the draft 
municipal waste management regulation for public scrutiny shall be 
published in the local newspaper before the start of the period of 
display. The notice shall include information about the main 
content of the draft, where it is to be displayed and the period 
during which objections can be submitted and to whom. 
 
Section 15  
The provisions of sections 13 and 14 shall also 
apply to any amendments to a municipal waste management 
regulation. 
Municipalities need not display draft amendments to a municipal 
waste management regulation for public scrutiny if they only 
concern a small number of property owners or if the amendments 
are limited in scope. 
 
Section 16 
The Government may issue rules requiring 
operators whose professional activities generate waste to give the 
municipality any information that may be necessary for the 
purposes of its waste management regulation. The Government 
may delegate the issuance of such rules to municipalities. 
 
Section 17 
Apart from their obligations under the municipal 
waste management regulation, municipalities must remove 
household waste if the owner or tenant of a property so requests 
and the request is not unreasonable in view of the circumstances. 
Waste management 
Section 18  
Where a municipality or a producer is responsible 
for removing waste, it must not be composted or buried or 
otherwise recycled or removed by the owner or tenant of the 
property. 
However, the provisions of the first paragraph shall not apply to 
waste that can be disposed of on the property without any risk of 
detriment to human health or the environment. 
In individual cases the municipality may, in the case of waste 
would otherwise have been disposed of by the municipality, allow 
owners or tenants of properties to dispose of waste generated on 
their premises themselves, if they can do so in a manner that is safe 
for human health and the environment and there are special reasons 
for granting such an exemption. 


--- PAGE 74 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
87
Even where a permit is not required, a permit application may be 
submitted to the municipality for activities or measures referred to 
in the second paragraph. 
 
Section 19 
If it is necessary for the purposes of reuse or 
recycling or for other health or environmental reasons, the 
Government may issue rules requiring certain kinds of waste to be 
stored and transported separately from other waste and may issue 
any other rules that are necessary for this purpose. The 
Government may delegate the issuance of such rules to public 
authorities or municipalities. 
 
Section 20  
If it is necessary for the purposes of reuse or 
recycling or for other health or environmental reasons, the 
Government may issue rules prohibiting the landfilling of 
combustible and organic waste. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules concerning exemptions or waive the prohibitions 
mentioned in the first paragraph in individual cases. 
 
Section 21  
If the municipality is responsible for arranging for 
the transport of waste, such removal may not be undertaken by any 
party other than the municipality or the person engaged by the 
municipality for the purpose. 
If a producer is responsible for arranging for the transport of 
waste, the Government may issue rules prohibiting persons other 
than the producer or the person engaged for the purpose by the 
producer from undertaking such transport. 
Authorization to issue rules concerning certain kinds of waste 
Section 22 
If it is necessary in order to promote the reuse of 
parts or the recycling of materials from scrap vehicles in the sense 
of the Motor Vehicle Disposal Act (1975:343), the Government or 
the authority appointed by the Government may issue rules 
concerning professional dismantling and similar professional 
disposal of scrap vehicles. 
 
Section 23 
If it is necessary for the purposes of reuse or 
recycling or for other health or environmental reasons, the 
Government may issue rules: 


--- PAGE 75 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
88
1. concerning professional pre-treatment, including dismantling 
and separation, of waste consisting of electrical and electronic 
equipment; and 
2. stipulating that persons engaged in the professional pre-
treatment, including dismantling and separation, of waste 
consisting of electrical and electronic equipment shall employ 
personnel or use quality systems that are certified by a body 
accredited pursuant to the Technical Verification Act (1992:1119). 
 
Section 24 
If it is necessary for the purposes of reuse or 
recycling or for other health or environmental reasons, the 
Government 
may 
issue 
rules 
prohibiting 
the 
landfilling, 
incineration and shredding of waste consisting of electrical and 
electronic equipment prior to pre-treatment in accordance with 
section 23. 
Authorization to issue rules concerning permit requirements 
etc. 
Section 25  
Where necessary for health or environmental 
reasons, the Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government may issue rules to the effect that: 
1. waste may only be professionally transported by persons who 
hold a licence or are registered by the authority appointed by the 
Government, or that special conditions shall apply to such 
activities; and 
2. persons whose professional activities generate waste other 
than household waste shall deliver the waste for removal to a 
person who holds a transport licence or is registered with the 
appointed authority. 
Applications for permits referred to in the first paragraph, point 
1 shall be submitted to the authority appointed by the 
Government. 
 
Section 26 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules requiring persons whose 
professional activities generate waste other than household waste 
or who professionally handle such waste to supply information 
about the nature, composition and quantity of the waste and about 
its origin and where the waste is deposited. This information shall 


--- PAGE 76 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
89
be given to the municipal committee that is the supervisory 
authority. 
 
Section 27 
If it is necessary for health or environmental 
reasons, the Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government may issue rules requiring professional waste collectors 
or persons who professionally undertake the removal or recycling 
of waste for third parties to be registered with the authority 
appointed by the Government. This shall not apply to persons who 
must obtain permits or submit notification in accordance with 
rules issued pursuant to section 25 or with other provisions of this 
Code. 
Authorization to issue rules concerning waste in consequence of 
Sweden’s membership of the European Union 
Section 28 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue any rules concerning waste, waste 
disposal planning and restrictions with respect to waste transports 
that are necessary in consequence of Sweden’s membership of the 
European Union. 
Authorization to issue rules for the defence sector 
Section 29 
The Government or, where the Government so 
decides, the Surgeon-General of the Swedish Armed Forces may 
issue special rules for the Swedish Armed Forces, the National 
Fortifications 
Administration, 
the 
Defence 
Matériel 
Administration or the National Defence Radio Centre that differ 
from the provisions of this chapter. 
Littering 
Section 30 
Leaving litter out of doors in places to which the 
public has access or which are within its view shall be prohibited. 
 


--- PAGE 77 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
90
Dumping 
Section 31  
Waste, whether in the form of solid matter, 
liquids or gas, must not be dumped in Sweden’s territorial waters 
or economic zone. Waste must not be dumped from Swedish 
vessels or aircraft in the open sea. Waste intended for dumping in 
the open sea must not be taken out of the country or Sweden’s 
economic zone. 
The provisions relating to dumping shall also be applicable to the 
incineration of waste. 
 
Section 32 
The provisions of section 31 first paragraph shall 
not apply to discharges of harmful substances from vessels which 
are governed by the Measures against Pollution from Ships Act 
(1980:424).  
 
Section 33  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may by decision in individual cases grant 
exemptions from section 31 first paragraph where waste can be 
dumped without detriment to human health and the environment. 
If the dumping of waste causes damage that was not anticipated 
when the permit was granted, the authority that granted the permit 
may issue an injunction for the purpose of remedying the damage. 
If the damage is not remedied or if conditions or rules are not 
complied with, the permit may be withdrawn. 
 


--- PAGE 78 ---

 
91
PART FOUR 
CONSIDERATION OF CASES AND MATTERS
CONSIDERATION OF CASES AND MATTERS
CONSIDERATION OF CASES AND MATTERS
CONSIDERATION OF CASES AND MATTERS 
Chapter 16. General provisions concerning the consideration of 
cases and matters 
Reviewing authorities 
Section 1  
The Government, county administrative boards 
and 
other 
administrative 
authorities, 
municipalities, 
the 
environmental courts, the Superior Environmental Court and the 
Supreme Court shall deal with cases and matters governed by this 
Code, or rules issued in pursuance thereof. However, the 
provisions relating to criminal proceedings in general shall be 
applicable to cases concerning penalties or forfeiture referred to in 
chapter 29. 
Detailed rules concerning the cases and matters to be dealt with 
by the respective reviewing authorities are contained in chapter 17, 
sections 1 to 4, chapter 18, sections 1 to 2, chapter 19, sections 1 to 
2, chapter 20, section 2, chapter 23, section 1 and chapter 23, 
section 9. 
Decisions or judgments relating to the withdrawal of permits, 
exemptions and approvals and to prohibitions against continued 
activities and reviews of permits or conditions shall be taken by the 
licensing authority. 
Permits, approvals and exemptions 
Section 2  
Permits, 
approvals 
or 
exemptions 
granted 
pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in pursuance thereof may 
be valid for a limited period. The Government may issue further 
rules concerning such time limits. 
Conditions may be attached to permits, approvals and 
exemptions granted pursuant to this Code or to regulations issued 
in pursuance thereof. 


--- PAGE 79 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
92
Application cases are defined in chapter 21, section 1 and chapter 
22, section 1 contains provisions concerning the contents of 
applications in such cases. The Government may issue rules 
concerning the content of applications in other cases. 
 
Section 3  
The validity of a permit, approval or exemption 
may be made subject to the requirement that the person who 
intends to pursue the activity must furnish a security for the costs 
of after-treatment and any other restoration measures that may be 
necessary as a result. The state, municipalities, county councils and 
associations of municipalities shall not be required to furnish a 
security. 
If there is cause to assume that the security furnished is no 
longer sufficient, the authority which is considering the application 
for a permit, approval or exemption may require an additional 
security to be furnished. 
The type of security shall be governed by chapter 2, section 25 
of the Enforcement Code. Securities shall be examined by the 
licensing authority and lodged with the county administrative 
board. 
 
Section 4 
Permits and exemptions must not conflict with 
detailed development plans or area regulations adopted pursuant to 
the Planning and Building Act (1987:10). Nevertheless, minor 
departures may be allowed if they are not contrary to the purpose 
of the plan or the rules. 
 
Section 5 
Permits, approvals and exemptions must not be 
granted for new activities which are likely to be instrumental in 
infringing environmental quality standards. However, an activity 
may be permitted where the operator takes measures as a result of 
which the detriment caused by other activities is terminated or 
reduced, thus materially improving the possibility of complying 
with the environmental quality standard. 
 
Section 6 
A permit, approval or exemption may be refused 
to a person who did not discharge his obligations under a previous 
permit, approval or exemption. The same shall apply to a person 
who has previously omitted to apply for the necessary permit, 
approval or exemption. Where such omission has occurred, a 
permit, approval or exemption may also be refused if the applicant 
or a person who, by reason of the ownership structure or the 


--- PAGE 80 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
93
division of responsibilities, is closely associated with the applicant’s 
activities, is or was similarly associated with the activity in which 
the omission occurred. 
 
Section 7 
In connection with the consideration of cases and 
matters pursuant to this Code, attention shall be paid to other 
activities or special structures that are likely to be necessary for 
efficient operations. 
 
Section 8  
Where two or more persons who pursue or intend 
to pursue an activity agree to take measures to prevent or combat 
detriment to human health and the environment, the conditions 
referred to in section 2 second paragraph may apply to two or more 
activities. This shall only be contemplated where it is calculated to 
increase the likelihood of compliance with the environmental 
quality standards referred to in chapter 5 or to secure benefits in 
terms of health and the environment in some other way. 
Matters referred to in the first paragraph may be resolved by a 
joint decision to grant a permit subject to certain conditions for 
the activities or by separate decisions laying down the same 
conditions for both parties. 
 
Section 9  
Permits 
and 
exemptions 
and 
decisions 
to 
withdraw permits or exemptions may be issued subject to the 
obligation to carry out or pay for the following measures: 
1. a special examination of the area concerned; 
2. specific measures for conservation of the area; and 
3. specific measures to compensate for any encroachment on 
public interests due to the activity. 
The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the 
obligations of persons who are liable for after-treatment pursuant 
to chapter 10. 
 
Section 10 
If 
a 
water 
operation 
is 
pursued 
without 
permission, the burden of proof shall rest on the operator to 
establish 
the 
water 
conditions 
that 
prevailed 
prior 
to 
commencement of the operation. 
 
Section 11  
If cases or matters governed by this Code that 
concern permits or exemptions for various activities are dealt with 
simultaneously, and the activities cannot be pursued concurrently 
as requested in the applications because they relate to the same 


--- PAGE 81 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
94
natural resource or for some other reason, the activities shall, if 
possible, be modified so that they can commence without 
significant detriment to either of them. If such modification is 
impossible, priority shall be given to the activity that is most 
consistent with the provisions of chapter 3. 
The first paragraph shall not apply where an association is 
established for the respective activities pursuant to the Act 
(1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning Water 
Operations. 
Right of appeal 
Section 12  
Appeals 
may 
be 
made 
against 
appealable 
judgments or decisions by: 
1. any person who is the subject of a judgment or decision 
against him; 
2. local employees’ associations that organize workers in the 
activity to which the decision relates in the case of judgments and 
decisions concerning permits for environmentally hazardous 
activities; 
3. national employees’ organizations within the meaning of the 
Codetermination at Work Act (1976:580), the corresponding 
employers’ organizations and consumer associations in the case of 
decisions taken by a county administrative board or a central 
administrative authority pursuant to an authorization issued in 
accordance with chapter 14, provided that the decision does not 
relate to an individual case; and 
4. authorities, municipal committees or other bodies which have 
a right of appeal pursuant to specific provisions in this Code or to 
rules issued in pursuance thereof. 
The provisions of this section shall be without prejudice to the 
right of appeal provided by the Code of Judicial Procedure. 
 
Section 13  
Appeals 
may 
be 
made 
against 
appealable 
judgments or decisions concerning permits, approvals and 
exemptions issued pursuant to this Code by non-profit 
associations whose purpose according to their statutes is to 
promote nature conservation or environmental protection 
interests. The right of appeal against judgments and decisions shall 
be subject to the requirement that the association has operated in 


--- PAGE 82 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
95
Sweden for at least three years and has not less than 2,000 
members. 
However, non-profit associations may not appeal against 
decisions relating to the Swedish Armed Forces, the National 
Fortifications 
Administration, 
the 
Defence 
Matériel 
Administration or the National Defence Radio Centre. 
An environmental organization that wishes to appeal against a 
judgment or decision referred to in the first paragraph must do so 
within the time limit fixed for the parties to the case or for other 
claimants with a right of appeal in the case or matter. 
 


--- PAGE 83 ---

 
97
Chapter 17. The Government’s consideration of permissibility 
Compulsory consideration of permissibility 
Section 1 
The Government shall consider the permissibility 
of new activities or operations of the following kinds: 
1. iron and steel works, metallurgical works and ferro-alloy 
plants; 
2. pulp plants and paper mills; 
3. crude oil refineries or heavy petrochemical plants; 
4. plants for the manufacture of basic chemicals or fertilizers; 
5. cement plants; 
6. nuclear installations that are subject to examination by the 
Government pursuant to the Nuclear Activities Act (1984:3) and 
plants for the extraction of uranium-bearing materials or other 
substances that can be used for the production of nuclear fuel; 
7. combustion plants with an input power of not less than 200 
megawatts; 
8. wind farms consisting of clusters of three or more wind 
turbines with a total output of not less than 10 megawatts; 
9. facilities for the storage of not less than 50 million normal 
cubic metres of natural gas; 
10. facilities for the treatment of hazardous waste where most of 
the waste that is to be treated in the facility is from other 
establishments and more than 10,000 tonnes of hazardous waste 
are incinerated per year or otherwise recycled or disposed of at the 
facility; 
11. structures for the extraction of substances or materials in the 
areas mentioned in chapter 4, section 5; 
12. hydroelectric power plants designed for an installed 
generator output of not less than 20 megawatts; 
13. water regulation facilities with a water reservoir capacity of 
not less than 100 million cubic metres per year or 10 million cubic 
metres per week; 
14. diversion or other removal of water from watercourses or 
lakes with a normal low flow without water regulation of not less 
than 10 cubic metres per second at the point of outlet, where the 


--- PAGE 84 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
98
amount of water used is such that the flow is less than four-fifths 
of the normal unregulated low flow; 
15. groundwater catchments supplying more than 10,000 cubic 
metres of water per day, unless nine-tenths of the water removed is 
restored to the groundwater reservoir; 
16. regulation, diversion or removal operations apart from those 
already mentioned which affect Lake Vänern, Lake Vättern, Lake 
Mälaren, Lake Hjälmaren, Lake Storsjön in Jämtland or Lake Siljan, 
where the operations are likely to be substantial or intrusive; 
17. the construction of platforms for offshore oil or gas 
extraction and of anchorages or moorings for such platforms, other 
than temporary ones, for the purposes of repairs, conversion or 
some other reason; 
18. motorways, expressways and other roads with at least four 
traffic lanes that are not less than ten kilometres in length; 
19. long-distance railway lines and the construction of at least 
five kilometres of new tracks for existing long-distance railway 
lines; 
20. public navigation channels; 
21. airports with a runway length of at least 2,100 metres. 
 
Section 2 
In special circumstances the Government may in 
individual cases decide not to examine an activity mentioned in 
section 1. 
Consideration of permissibility following exercise of reserved 
rights 
Section 3  
In individual cases the Government may reserve 
the right to consider the permissibility of an activity or operation 
for which an assessment pursuant to section 1 is not compulsory, 
where: 
1. with regard to the interests to be promoted by this Code in 
accordance with chapter 1, section 1, the scope of the activity is or 
is likely to be substantial or intrusive; 
2. the activity is likely, outside areas designated as special 
protection areas or special areas of conservation pursuant to 
chapter 7, section 28 the first or the second paragraph, to cause 
damage to the area’s natural assets that is not inconsiderable; 
3. chapter 4, section 6 third paragraph is applicable to the 
activity. 


--- PAGE 85 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
99
The reserved right mentioned in the first paragraph, point 2 shall 
only apply to activities for which a permit is required pursuant to 
this Code or to rules issued in pursuance thereof. 
Where a case or matter is the subject of an ongoing permit 
application procedure pursuant to this Code, the Government shall 
immediately notify the environmental court or authority which is 
considering the application of the reservation. 
 
Section 4 
In connection with the consideration of an 
activity mentioned in section 1 or section 3, the Government may 
reserve the right to consider the permissibility of another activity 
where the application relates to permits for both activities and they 
are related, or the question of modification or priority between the 
activities arises pursuant to chapter 16, section 11. Section 3 third 
paragraph shall be applicable to such a reserved right. 
Notification 
Section 5 
If an authority or municipality is advised of the 
existence of an activity referred to in section 3 in its jurisdiction, it 
shall notify the Government thereof. 
Approval by municipal councils 
Section 6  
The Government may only permit an activity 
referred to in section 1, points 1 to 11 and 17 if it has been 
approved by a municipal council. 
The same shall apply to government permission for activities 
referred to in section 3, first paragraph, point 1 or section 4 other 
than water operations or transport facilities. 
Without prejudice to the first paragraph, the Government may 
permit an activity referred to in section 1, point 6 that involves 
intermediate storage or final disposal of nuclear material or waste 
or an activity referred to in section 1, point 7, 8, 9 or 10, if the 
activity is of the utmost importance with regard to the national 
interest. However, this shall not apply where another site is 
considered more appropriate for the activity or if an appropriate 
site has been designated for the activity in another municipality 
which is likely to approve the site. 


--- PAGE 86 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
100 
Safeguards for public interests 
Section 7 
Where the Government rules that an activity is 
permissible in accordance with this chapter, it may lay down special 
conditions in order to safeguard public interests. 
 


--- PAGE 87 ---

 
101
Chapter 18. The Government’s reviews of decisions etc. which 
have been appealed against 
Section 1 
Following appeals, the Government shall review: 
1. 
decisions 
by 
government 
agencies 
relating 
to 
the 
establishment, alteration or withdrawal of the status of national 
parks, nature reserves, culture reserves, natural monuments, shore 
protection areas, environmental protection zones or water 
protection areas, excluding matters relating to compensation; and 
2. decisions taken by the Surgeon-General of the Swedish Armed 
Forces pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in pursuance 
thereof, and  
3. other decisions when it is stipulated appeal to the 
Government. (Law 1999:368) 
 
Section 2 
Where a permit is required for an activity or 
operation, the Government shall review matters mentioned in 
chapter 17, section 1 that are referred to it. 
 


--- PAGE 88 ---

 
103
Chapter 19. Consideration of matters by administrative 
authorities and municipalities 
General provisions concerning the consideration of matters 
Section 1  
Administrative authorities and municipalities shall 
consider matters in accordance with the provisions of this Code or 
rules issued in pursuance thereof. 
Appeals against decisions by municipalities relating to the 
establishment, alteration or withdrawal of the status of nature 
reserves, culture reserves, natural monuments, shore protection 
areas or water protection areas, with the exception of decisions 
concerning compensation, may be lodged with the competent 
county administrative board unless other provision is specifically 
made. Appeals against decisions by municipal committees in 
individual cases may be lodged with the county administrative 
board, unless other provision is specifically made. 
Appeals against decisions by county administrative boards and 
other government agencies in individual cases may be lodged with 
an environmental court pursuant to chapter 20, section 2, second 
paragraph. 
 
Section 2  
Where an administrative authority or municipality 
rules that an activity or measure may only be permitted in 
accordance with chapter 2, section 9 first paragraph or section 10, 
the authority or municipality shall refer the matter to the 
Government for a decision, together with its own opinion. The 
same shall apply to the Government’s consideration of 
permissibility pursuant to chapter 17, section 1 or where the 
Government reserves the right to consider permissibility in 
accordance with chapter 17, section 3. 
Pursuant to chapter 17, section 5, activities referred to in chapter 
17, section 3 must be reported to the Government. 
 
Section 3 
The provisions of chapter 21, section 3 relating to 
proceedings in environmental courts shall also apply to county 
administrative boards where the matter would otherwise have been 
dealt with by a municipality. 


--- PAGE 89 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
104 
Special provisions concerning examination of environmentally 
hazardous activities 
Section 4 
County administrative boards and municipal 
committees shall: 
1. give persons affected by the activity the opportunity to 
comment by publishing notices in local newspapers or by other 
suitable means; 
2. consult government and municipal authorities which have a 
substantial interest in the matter; 
3. hold a meeting with persons affected by the matter and 
arrange an on-site inspection if this is necessary for the purposes of 
the investigation; and 
4. notify persons who have submitted applications or presented 
comments through another person and give them the opportunity 
to comment, subject to section 17 of the Administrative 
Procedures Act (1986:223). 
 
Section 5 
The following provisions shall be applicable to 
matters dealt with by county administrative boards or municipal 
committees: 
1. chapter 22, section 1 first paragraph concerning the form and 
content of applications; 
2. chapter 22, section 2 concerning the submission of 
applications and any deficiencies in them; 
3. chapter 22, section 3, concerning the content of notices; 
4. chapter 22, section 6, concerning the right to sue; 
5. chapter 22, section 9, concerning the right to act as the legal 
representative for a property; 
6. chapter 22, section 12, concerning experts; 
7. chapter 22, section 13, concerning on-site inspections;  
8. chapter 22, section 25, first paragraph, points 1 to 3 and 5 to 
11, the last sentence of the second paragraph and the third 
paragraph, concerning the content of judgments relating to 
permits; 
9. chapter 22, section 26, concerning separate judgments; 
10. chapter 22, section 27, first paragraph, the second sentence of 
the second paragraph and the first sentence of the third paragraph, 
concerning postponed matters and provisional rules; 
11. chapter 22, section 28, the first sentence of the first 
paragraph , concerning enforcement orders; and 


--- PAGE 90 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
105
12. chapter 23, section 3, concerning separate appeals relating to 
experts referred to in chapter 22, section 12. (Law 1999:385). 


--- PAGE 91 ---

 
107
Chapter 20. Courts 
Courts 
Section 1  
The district courts so designated by the 
Government shall be regional environmental courts. 
The Superior Environmental Court shall be the Svea Court of 
Appeal. 
The final court of appeal shall be the Supreme Court. 
 
Section 2  
The environmental courts shall be the first 
instance for the hearing of cases concerning: 
1. environmentally hazardous activities which are application 
cases within the meaning of chapter 21, section 1 first paragraph; 
2. water operations and water structures within the meaning of 
chapter 11 and in the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions 
concerning Water Operations, with the exception of operations 
involving land drainage, which shall be examined by the competent 
county administrative board; 
3. land drainage which are referred by a county administrative 
board or reported by a property registration authority in 
accordance with the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions 
concerning Water Operations; 
4. compensation for damage and intrusion pursuant to chapter 
28, sections 2 to 5; 
5. compensation and compulsory public acquisitions referred to 
in this Code and acquisition in connection with water operations, 
unless other provision is specifically made; 
6. compensation for environmental damage and compulsory 
purchase referred to in chapter 32 and actions relating to 
prohibitions or precautions referred to in chapter 32, section 12; 
7. the allocation of joint and several liability between several 
parties pursuant to chapter 10, sections 6 and 7 at the suit of one of 
the liable parties; 
8. the award of prospective fines pursuant to this Code at the 
petition of the authority that issued the injunction. Section 6 
second paragraph of the Prospective Fines Act (1985:206) shall be 
applicable to injunctions issued subject to a penalty of a fine. 


--- PAGE 92 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
108 
In accordance with chapter 19, section 1, third paragraph, the 
environmental courts shall, unless other provision is made, review 
appeals against decisions taken by county administrative boards 
and other government agencies pursuant to this Code or to rules 
issued in pursuance thereof or pursuant to the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations. 
Pursuant 
to 
chapter 
26, 
section 
17 
second 
paragraph, 
environmental courts shall review decisions by the Enforcement 
Service to provide assistance which have been appealed against. 
 
Section 3  
Subject to the provisions of this Code or other 
legislation, the existing provisions concerning civil actions in 
ordinary courts shall also be applicable to environmental courts and 
the Superior Environmental Court and to reviews of cases arising 
out of this Code by the Supreme Court. The Court Proceedings 
Act (1996:242) shall be applicable to the examination of cases. 
When an environmental court deals with a case relating to the 
award of prospective fines in a separate action, this aspect of the 
case shall be examined in accordance with the rules of the Code of 
Judicial Procedure concerning actions in which the maximum 
penalty for the offence is a fine. 
Subject to the provisions of this Code or other legislation, the 
provisions of the Judicial Procedure in Administrative Matters Act 
(1971:291) shall be applied by environmental courts in cases 
referred to them following an appeal and in reviews of appeals 
against decisions in such cases that are lodged with the Superior 
Environmental Court. However, section 7 a of the Judicial 
Procedure in Administrative Matters Act shall not be applicable to 
appeals against decisions or judgments that are lodged by non-
profit associations pursuant to chapter 16 section 13 of this Code. 
Environmental courts 
Section 4 
An environmental court shall consist of a 
president, who shall be a legally qualified district court judge, an 
environmental adviser and two expert members. The court may 
also comprise an additional qualified judge and an additional 
environmental adviser. 
Environmental advisers shall have technical or scientific training 
and experience of environmental issues. One of the expert 
members shall have experience of matters falling within the area of 


--- PAGE 93 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
109
responsibility of the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency. 
The president shall decide, with reference to the nature of the case, 
whether the other expert member shall have experience of industry 
or of local government. 
 
Section 5  
Unless other provision is made by this Code, 
environmental courts shall be competent in the composition of the 
president and an environmental adviser in proceedings apart from 
main hearings. The same shall apply to main hearings in cases 
referred to in chapter 1, section 3 a second and third paragraph of 
the Code of Judicial Procedure. However, if such cases are decided 
on the merits without a main hearing, the composition shall be that 
mentioned in section 4, unless the court finds that the composition 
of the president and one environmental adviser is sufficient and the 
parties agree, or if the case is a simple one. 
In a case referred to in section 3 third paragraph, the 
environmental court shall consist of the president and one 
environmental adviser. In the case of decisions as to substance 
relating to permits, the composition shall be that mentioned in 
section 4. 
 
Section 6 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government shall appoint the president, appoint or engage 
environmental advisers and appoint expert members to serve on 
environmental courts. 
 
Section 7 
The Government shall define the judicial districts 
of the environmental courts. 
 
Section 8  
Cases concerning the conduct of environmentally 
hazardous activities, water operations, water structures and 
compensation arising out of water operations shall be tried by the 
environmental court in whose district the activity is, was or will be 
mainly pursued. 
Cases relating to compensation for damage and intrusion 
pursuant to chapter 28, sections 2 to 5 and to public intervention 
pursuant to this Code shall be tried by the environmental court in 
whose district most of the damage and intrusion has occurred or 
will occur. 
Cases relating to compensation for environmental damage 
referred to in chapter 32 shall be tried by the environmental court 
in whose district the harmful activity is or was mainly pursued. 


--- PAGE 94 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
110 
Any person who pursues or intends to pursue an activity that is 
liable to cause damage referred to in chapter 32, section 3 may 
apply for examination of the question of compensation to the 
court in whose district the activity is or will be mainly pursued. 
 
Section 9 
A matter referred to an environmental court 
following an appeal against the decision of an authority shall be 
tried by the environmental court in whose district the authority 
that originally dealt with the matter is situated. 
Where cases are tried jointly, the court that is competent to try 
one of the cases shall also be competent to try the other cases. 
The question of the environmental courts’ competence in 
relation to one another shall not be examined by a higher court 
except in cases referred to in chapter 10, section 20 second 
paragraph of the Code of Judicial Procedure. 
 
Section 10 
When a vote is taken, legally qualified judges shall 
first give their opinion, followed by the environmental advisers and 
lastly the expert members. The president shall have the casting vote 
except in cases relating to the award of prospective fines, where the 
most lenient opinion shall prevail. 
The Superior Environmental Court 
Section 11  
In order to fulfil its functions as the Superior 
Environmental Court, the Svea Court of Appeal shall appoint 
environmental advisers in addition to legally qualified judges. They 
shall have technical or scientific training and experience of 
environmental issues. The Government or the authority appointed 
by the Government shall appoint or engage environmental advisers. 
The Superior Environmental Court shall be competent when 
four members, at least three of whom shall be legally qualified 
judges, are present. If one of the legally qualified members is 
prevented from attending after the main hearing has commenced, 
the court shall be competent nevertheless. No more than five 
members may attend. 
In matters relating to leave to appeal, the Superior Environmental 
Court shall consist of three legally qualified judges. However, an 
environmental adviser may be included in the court instead of one 
of the legally qualified members. 
 


--- PAGE 95 ---

 
111
Chapter 21. Cases in environmental courts 
Section 1 
Application cases are cases: 
1. concerning permits for environmentally hazardous activities 
referred to in chapter 9, section 6 which, pursuant to the provisions 
of chapter 9, section 8, shall not be considered by county 
administrative boards or municipalities; 
2. concerning permits for water operations referred to in chapter 
11, section 9 which shall not be considered by county 
administrative boards; 
3. concerning approval pursuant to chapter 11, section 16 of 
alteration or repair works that have been carried out or of measures 
taken contrary to existing rules concerning the storage and release 
of water, where the works or measures do not include land drainage 
which falls within the jurisdiction of the county administrative 
board; 
4. concerning permits referred to in chapter 11 for the removal 
of a water structure or permit application procedures referred to in 
chapter 11, section 22; 
5. concerning extension pursuant to chapter 24, section 2 second 
paragraph of the time limit for completion or commencement of an 
activity; 
6. concerning withdrawal of a permit or prohibition of continued 
activities pursuant to chapter 24, section 3; 
7. concerning reviews referred to in chapter 24, sections 5 to 9 
and chapter 7, sections 13 to 15 of the Act (1998:812) Containing 
Special Provisions concerning Water Operations; and 
8. cases referred to in chapter 7, section 1 of the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations. 
 
Where application cases relate exclusively to a certain party 
or parties and the ruling may only be binding upon these parties, 
the environmental court may, if the applicant gives his consent, 
rule that the case shall be examined in accordance with the 
provisions of chapter 7 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations that relate to summons 
cases. 
 
Section 2 
Proceedings in cases that are not application cases 
within the meaning of section 1 shall be instituted by summons 
applications, unless other provision is specifically made. Chapter 7 


--- PAGE 96 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
112 
of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning 
Water Operations shall be applicable to certain summons cases. 
Pursuant to chapter 20, section 3 third paragraph of this Code, 
certain cases shall be governed by the Judicial Procedure in 
Administrative Matters Act (1971:291). 
 
Section 3 
Cases and matters arising from this Code may be 
dealt with at a single trial even in cases or matters other than those 
referred to in chapter 14, sections 1 to 7 of the Code of Judicial 
Procedure if the applicant is the same and the cases or matters 
relate to the same activity or related activities. If an environmental 
court examines such a case or matter, an application in a similar 
matter may be submitted to the court even where it would 
otherwise have been examined by a county administrative board or 
a municipality. Where a matter that has been examined by an 
administrative authority or a municipality is considered together 
with an application case, the provisions of chapter 20, section 3 
third paragraph concerning application of the provisions of the 
Judicial Procedure in Administrative Matters Act (1971:291) shall 
not be applicable. 
When examining a case or matter referred to in the first 
paragraph, an environmental court may reserve the right to 
examine a similar matter that is being considered by a county 
administrative board or a municipality. 
 
Section 4 
If 
a 
person brings an 
action before 
an 
environmental court for the prohibition of an environmentally 
hazardous activity or for an injunction upon a person who pursues 
or intends to pursue such an activity to take precautionary 
measures, the environmental court may not, where a permit 
application for the activity required by this Code is pending or is 
submitted for consideration before the court has taken a decision, 
make a ruling until a decision has been delivered on the application. 
 
Section 5 
If, pursuant to chapter 26, section 9 first 
paragraph, a supervisory authority prohibits environmentally 
hazardous activities or decides that persons who pursue, or intend 
to pursue, such an activity shall take precautionary measures, and if 
a permit application is submitted pursuant to this Code, the 
environmental court may, where the applicant furnishes a security 
for costs and damage, decide that the decision of the supervisory 


--- PAGE 97 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
113
authority shall not be executed until a decision is taken on the 
application or the court provides otherwise. 
Chapter 2, section 25 of the Enforcement Code shall be 
applicable to the type of security. The security shall be examined 
by the court and shall be lodged with the county administrative 
board. 
 
Section 6 
If an environmental court has tried a case relating 
to a matter governed by this Code, the question whether the case 
should be dealt with by a court other than an environmental court 
or by an authority other than a court may only be examined by a 
higher court if: 
1. an appeal is lodged with the court or an action is brought 
there by a party so entitled; 
2. the environmental court has examined a question relating to 
the title to a property or to the division of property; 
3. the environmental court has examined a question for which a 
separate procedure is required by this Code; or 
4. the environmental court has examined a question relating to 
liability for an offence. 
 
Section 7  
Where an environmental court finds that an 
activity or measure can only be permitted in accordance with 
chapter 2, section 9 first paragraph or section 10, it shall refer the 
matter to the Government for a decision, together with its own 
opinion. The same shall apply to the Government’s consideration 
of permissibility pursuant to chapter 17, section 1 or where the 
Government reserves the right to assess permissibility pursuant to 
chapter 17, section 3. 
Where an environmental court finds that a case before the court 
also relates to a public interest of great importance other than 
those referred to in chapter 1, section 1, it shall refer the matter to 
the Government for a decision, together with its own opinion. The 
same shall apply where the Swedish Environmental Protection 
Agency requests that the case be referred to the Government for 
the same reason. Where the matter concerns a decision by a public 
authority relating to the Swedish Armed Forces, the National 
Fortifications 
Administration, 
the 
Defence 
Matériel 
Administration or the National Defence Radio Centre, the court 
shall always refer the matter to the Government for a decision, 
together with its own opinion. 
 


--- PAGE 98 ---

 
115
Chapter 
22. 
The 
procedure 
for 
application 
cases 
in 
environmental courts 
Section 1  
An application in an application case shall be made 
in writing. It shall contain: 
1. any information, drawings and technical descriptions that are 
necessary for an assessment of the nature and scope of the activity 
or measure; 
2. an environmental impact statement pursuant to chapter 6 and 
information about any consultations that have taken place pursuant 
to chapter 6, sections 4 to 6; 
3. any information that is necessary for an assessment of 
compliance with the general rules of consideration laid down in 
chapter 2;  
4. proposals for any protective measures or other precautions 
that may be necessary in order to prevent or remedy the adverse 
effects of the activity;  
5. proposals for control of the activity, and 
6. a security report in those cases where the Act (1999:381) on 
Measures to Prevent and Limit the Consequences of Major  
Chemical Accidents is applicable on the activity.  
In cases relating to water operations, applications shall also 
contain the following: 
1. information as to whether or not any properties are affected 
by the operations and, where applicable, the names and addresses 
of the owners of the properties and any holders of special rights 
thereto; and 
2. a statement of the compensation amounts offered by the 
applicant to each party to the case, unless it is appropriate to 
postpone the submission of such information on account of the 
scope of the operations. 
Chapter 7, section 4 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions 
concerning 
Water 
Operations 
contains 
further 
provisions concerning the content of applications in cases relating 
to water operations in certain circumstances. (Law 1999:385) 
 
Section 2  
The application documents shall be submitted in 
the number of copies that the environmental court considers 
necessary. 


--- PAGE 99 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
116 
If the number of copies of application documents submitted is 
not sufficient, or if the environmental court considers the 
application incomplete, it shall order the applicant to correct the 
fault within a specified period. If the applicant does not comply 
with the injunction, the court may rule that the fault shall be 
remedied at the applicant’s expense or, where the fault is so serious 
that the application cannot be used as a basis for examination of 
the case, it may reject the application. 
 
Section 3  
When an application is to be considered, the 
environmental court shall publish a notice. The notice shall 
contain: 
1. a brief presentation of the application and, where the case 
relates to water operations, information about any properties that 
may be affected; 
2. information about the provisions of sections 7, 10 and 19; 
3. the time limit for the submission of comments pursuant to 
section 10; 
4. a notice to the effect that summonses and other 
communications in the case to the parties shall be inserted in all the 
local newspapers or certain specified newspapers, and that, unless 
they are sent separately to a party, they shall be made available by 
the keeper of the file; and 
5. the name and address of the keeper of the file. 
The environmental court shall appoint one or more persons to 
keep copies of the documents in the case (keepers of the file). 
The notice shall be published in a local newspaper without delay. 
In cases relating to water operations a copy of the notice shall be 
sent to each party to the case who is mentioned in the application 
or otherwise known to the court. 
If the application relates to real estate that belongs to several 
properties, a copy of the notice need not be sent to each of the 
members of the association. If the association is known to have a 
board, a copy of the notice shall be sent to the board. 
 
Section 4  
A copy of the application documents and the 
notice shall be sent to the Swedish Environmental Protection 
Agency, the Legal, Financial and Administrative Services Agency, 
the Swedish Rescue Services Agency and the National Board of 
Fisheries. However, if the activity does not affect public fishing 
interests or some other public interest, the documents need not be 
transmitted. 


--- PAGE 100 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
117
The notice shall also be sent to the municipalities concerned and 
the municipal committee or committees in the field of 
environmental and health services and to county administrative 
boards and other government agencies which may be affected by 
the application. (Law 1999:385) 
 
Section 5 
The notice shall be communicated to: 
1. the governing board or other operator of any canal or lock 
system, other public navigation channel or public port or floatway 
which is affected by the application; 
2. the governing board of any water association affected by the 
application and the governing board or other manager of any 
association referred to in this Code or corresponding previously 
applicable provisions; 
3. the owners of any hydroelectric power plants, if the 
application relates to utilization of the power generated; 
4. the owner of any property to which a hydropower 
development right is attached which supplies cooperative power, in 
the case of applications mentioned in chapter 7, section 1 second 
paragraph, point 3 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations; and 
5. any holder of a permit which is the subject of an application 
referred to in chapter 21, section 1 first paragraph, point 6 or 7 of 
this Code. 
 
Section 6  
The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, 
the Legal, Financial and Administrative Services Agency, the 
Swedish Rescue Services Agency and the competent county 
administrative board shall, where necessary, plead in the case in 
order to safeguard environmental interests and other public 
interests. 
Municipalities may plead in the case in order to safeguard 
environmental interests and other public interests in the 
municipality. 
The National Board of Fisheries shall, if documents have been 
sent to it pursuant to section 4, deliver an opinion on the effects of 
the water structure or operations on public fishing interests and 
propose any rules that may be necessary to protect fishing. If the 
Board considers that an on-site inspection is necessary before it can 
deliver an opinion, it shall notify the environmental court to that 
effect, and the court shall appoint an expert investigation pursuant 
to section 12. (Law 1999:385) 


--- PAGE 101 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
118 
 
Section 7 
Owners of properties that are affected by an 
application in a case relating to water operations shall state the 
names of holders of easements, rights of use or rights to electric 
power pertaining to the property. If the owner of a property fails 
to do so without a valid reason, and if such parties incur loss as a 
result, he shall be liable for the loss. 
 
Section 8 
If the environmental court is notified or otherwise 
advised of a party only after publication of the notice, he shall, 
unless he has pleaded in the case, be given suitable opportunity to 
make a statement. However, the proceedings must not be delayed. 
 
Section 9  
If there is a dispute concerning a property affected 
by the activity which is the subject of the case, the litigant who 
possesses the property with a claim to title shall have the right to 
represent the property in the case until such time as it is lawfully 
won from him. 
A new owner must not alter any agreements entered into by the 
previous owner or any other measures taken in the case that are 
binding upon the previous owner. If the previous owner received 
communications and summonses in the case, new notices or 
summonses need not be communicated to the new owner. 
 
Section 10 
Comments on the application shall be made in 
writing and submitted in triplicate to the environmental court 
within the time fixed by the court. One copy shall be sent to the 
applicant. 
 
Section 11  
The continuing preparatory proceedings may take 
place in writing or orally. 
During the preparatory stage the environmental court shall 
ensure that the direction and scope of the judicial inquiry are 
appropriate. 
The court shall decide the subject of preliminary oral hearings 
and which parties are summoned to them. Summonses shall be 
served upon the parties or published in the local newspaper. 
Default judgments may not be delivered in connection with 
preliminary oral hearings. The parties may refer to documentation 
that they have submitted. A statement should be made of the 
content of this documentation. 
 


--- PAGE 102 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
119
Section 12 
If a special investigation or valuation is necessary 
for an assessment of the case, the environmental court may appoint 
one or more experts to deliver an opinion in the case after making a 
preliminary investigation. Such an investigation shall be performed 
without delay. If it is necessary in view of the nature of the case or 
the purpose of the investigation, the court shall notify the parties 
by suitable means of the time when the investigation is to take 
place. 
 
Section 13 
Where appropriate, an environmental court may 
instruct one or more members of the court to carry out an on-site 
inspection. The court shall notify the parties by suitable means of 
the time when the inspection is to take place. A record shall be 
made of the inspection.  
 
Section 14  
At the request of the applicant, the environmental 
court may decide without a main hearing that measures may be 
taken to prevent or mitigate damage or adverse effects before a 
final decision is taken concerning such measures. In that case, the 
applicant shall be required to lodge a security with the county 
administrative board for the compensation he may be obliged to 
pay as a result of the measures. Chapter 2, section 25 of the 
Enforcement Code shall be applicable to the type of security. 
The decision shall enter into force immediately, but it may be 
altered where the circumstances so require. 
 
Section 15  
If it appears from the opinion mentioned in 
section 12 or otherwise that the operations to which the 
application relates affect properties that are not mentioned in the 
notice referred to in section 3, the environmental court shall, in 
application of that section, give the owners and holders of special 
rights to such properties the opportunity to comment. 
Where it is more appropriate, the court may summon the parties 
to the main hearing in the case. The summonses shall be issued not 
later than eight days before the notice of the main hearing is 
communicated to the parties in accordance with the provisions that 
apply to the service of writs in civil actions. 
 
Section 16  
When the case is ready for the main hearing, the 
environmental court shall fix a time and place for it. 
If a main hearing is manifestly unnecessary, it need not be held. 
Where the parties so request, it shall be held nevertheless. The 


--- PAGE 103 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
120 
notice shall state that a ruling may be given in the case or matter on 
the basis of the documents alone. Main hearings need not be held 
in matters referred to in section 26 second paragraph. The same 
shall apply to cases referred to in chapter 42, section 18 first 
paragraph, points 1, 3 and 4 of the Code of Judicial Procedure. 
The details of the time and place of the main hearing shall be 
communicated to the parties in good time in accordance with the 
procedure determined for summonses to them. Where there is 
cause, the summons shall specify the matters to be examined at the 
main hearing. 
If it is necessary for a party to appear in person at the main 
hearing, the environmental court shall issue an injunction subject 
to a penalty of a fine. The injunction shall be served upon the 
party. 
The main hearing may be held even if a party does not appear. 
However, a default judgment must not be delivered. 
 
Section 17 
If the environmental court finds that a case can be 
examined without preliminary proceedings, it may summon the 
parties to the main hearing in the case by notice. In that case, 
sections 3 to 9 and 12 to 16 shall be applicable. The main hearing 
may be held three weeks after the date of notice at the earliest. 
 
Section 18 
An inspection shall be made in the case, unless 
this is unnecessary. 
 
Section 19 
Claims for compensation arising out of water 
operations or a measure referred to in chapter 11, section 22 and 
comments in response to the opinion on the operations referred to 
in section 12 shall be submitted in writing or orally at the main 
hearing at the latest. The environmental court may reject claims 
and comments submitted later unless they are made in response to 
observations made at the inspection or other circumstances that 
become known during the main hearing. 
 
Section 20 
At the start of the main hearing the president or 
another member should make a brief presentation of the 
application and the claims that have been entered in the case. The 
parties may refer to documentation submitted for the purposes of 
clarification of technical matters. A report shall be made on the 
content of this documentation. 


--- PAGE 104 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
121
Where the main hearing is postponed, the case shall be resumed 
at the same stage as at the end of the previous proceedings. 
However, if the members of the court who take part in the later 
proceedings were not present at the previous proceedings, a new 
main hearing shall be opened in the case. Evidence presented at the 
previous proceedings need not be presented again where it may be 
assumed to be unnecessary or where this would involve 
unreasonable cost or great inconvenience. 
 
Section 21  
The judgment of the environmental court shall be 
based on the findings of the inspection and any other proceedings 
before the court and on the content of the documents. 
The judgment shall be delivered as soon as possible in view of 
the nature of the case and other circumstances. If a main hearing 
has been held, a judgment shall be delivered within two months of 
the conclusion thereof, unless exceptional circumstances exist. 
The obligation laid down in chapter 17, section 9 seventh 
paragraph of the Code of Judicial Procedure to notify the parties of 
the content of the judgment shall be deemed to be discharged by 
making a copy of the judgment available through the appointed 
keeper or keepers of the file. 
 
Section 22  
When a party to a case relating to water 
operations considers that he is entitled to a higher compensation 
than that offered by the applicant, the environmental court may 
adjust the compensation payable to the other parties by the 
amounts necessary to ensure that the estimates are based on 
uniform criteria. The compensation awarded must not be lower 
than the amount offered by the applicant in the case. 
However, where a separate agreement is concluded between the 
parties, the compensation awarded must not differ from the 
amount agreed upon. 
 
Section 23 
Where necessary for the application of chapter 6, 
section 18 third paragraph of the Expropriation Act (1972:719), 
the environmental court shall estimate the value of a property 
concerned without any special rights that reduce this value. 
 
Section 24 
Before the environmental court delivers a 
judgment on compulsory purchase of part of a property, a map and 
a description of the area shall be drawn up and its boundaries shall 


--- PAGE 105 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
122 
be marked in accordance with the rules applying to property 
registration. 
 
Section 25  
A judgment granting a permit for an activity shall, 
where appropriate, include provisions concerning: 
1. the period of validity of the permit; 
2. the purpose, situation, scope, safety and technical design of 
the activity; 
3. supervision, inspections and checks; 
4. liability for compensation or for implementing preventive 
measures and the manner of payment; 
5. the obligation to pay charges or fees; 
6. any conditions that are necessary to prevent or limit any 
harmful impact or other detriment; 
7. any necessary conditions concerning the handling of chemical 
products in connection with the activity, where such handling may 
be detrimental to the external environment; 
8. any necessary conditions concerning waste disposal and 
recycling and reuse where handling, recycling or reuse may be 
detrimental to the external environment; 
9. any necessary measures relating to the management of land, 
water and other natural resources; 
10. any necessary measures relating to after-treatment and the 
furnishing of securities; 
11. any necessary measures to prevent major chemical accidents 
and limit the consequences of the accidents for human health and 
the environment, 
12. the period during which claims relating to unforeseen 
damage may be submitted; 
13. any loss of water or other assets that holders of permits 
referred to in chapter 31, sections 22 and 23 must accept without 
compensation; and 
14. litigation costs. 
If the permit relates to works for water operations, the judgment 
shall specify the time within which these works shall be completed. 
The maximum period shall be ten years. The time limit for 
commencement of the environmentally hazardous activities shall 
be stated. 
The environmental court may leave it to the discretion of the 
supervisory authority to lay down conditions of minor importance. 
Chapter 7, section 6 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions 
concerning 
Water 
Operations 
contains 
further 


--- PAGE 106 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
123
provisions concerning the content of judgments relating to water 
operations and structures. (Law 1999:385) 
 
Section 26  
At the request of the applicant the environmental 
court may rule on the question of the permissibility of the activity 
in a separate judgment, unless the matter must be decided by the 
Government pursuant to chapter 17, section 1, 3 or 4. 
If the court rules that the activity is permissible and it is 
important that it be completed without delay, the court may grant 
permission for the work that must be carried out in a separate 
judgment. Pursuant to section 16 second paragraph, a main hearing 
shall not be necessary. 
If a separate judgment is delivered, the court may decide to stay 
the proceedings in the rest of the case until the judgment has 
gained legal force. 
 
Section 27  
Where the effects of the activity cannot be 
predicted with sufficient certainty, the environmental court may, in 
granting permission for the activity, postpone the question of 
compensation or other conditions until information is available 
about the effects of the activity. 
In connection with the postponement decision, the court shall, 
with respect to any damage or loss that is likely to be substantial, 
issue provisional directions concerning compensation or protective 
measures. Where necessary in order to combat adverse effects, 
provisional directions concerning protective measures or other 
precautions may be issued. 
A ruling shall be made without delay on the matters postponed. 
The compensation awarded must not be lower than the amount 
fixed provisionally. 
Where a certain aspect of the case is postponed, the court shall 
require the applicant, as a condition for making use of the permit 
for the activity, to lodge a security with the county administrative 
board for the final compensation and for the compensation fixed 
provisionally, which shall not be paid before he makes use of the 
permit. Chapter 2, section 25 of the Enforcement Code shall be 
applicable to the type of security. 
The Limitation of Claims Act (1981:130) shall not apply to 
compensation claims that are subject to a postponement decision. 
 
Section 28  
Where appropriate, the environmental court may 
order that a permit for an activity may be used even where the 


--- PAGE 107 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
124 
judgment has not gained legal force. In that case, the applicant shall 
lodge a security with the county administrative board for any 
compensation that may be payable for a water operation if the 
court’s judgment is altered. Chapter 2, section 25 of the 
Enforcement Code shall be applicable to the type of security. 
If, after receiving a permit for an activity pursuant to this Code, 
the applicant is ordered to prevent or mitigate damage or to pay 
compensation, the court may rule that the judgment shall be 
executed as if it had gained legal force.  
If an appeal is made against a judgment to which an order is 
attached pursuant to the first or second paragraph, the Superior 
Environmental Court may set aside the order until the appeal 
against the judgment is examined in other respects. 
 


--- PAGE 108 ---

 
125
Chapter 23. Proceedings in the Superior Environmental Court 
and the Supreme Court 
Proceedings in the Superior Environmental Court 
Section 1  
Unless other provision is made, appeals against 
judgments delivered by environmental courts may be made to the 
Superior Environmental Court. The time limits for appeals laid 
down in chapter 50, sections 1 and 2 and chapter 52, section 1 of 
the Code of Judicial Procedure shall also apply to cases referred to 
them following an appeal. 
Leave to appeal shall be required for an appeal to the Superior 
Environmental Court against a judgment or decision delivered by 
an environmental court. Where leave to appeal is required, the 
judgment or decision of an environmental court shall contain a 
statement to that effect and a copy of the provisions of section 34 a 
of the Judicial Procedure in Administrative Matters Act 
(1971:291). 
 
Section 2  
Section 34 a of the Judicial Procedure in 
Administrative Matters Act (1971:291) shall be applicable to the 
consideration of applications for leave to appeal. 
If leave to appeal is not granted, the judgment or decision of the 
environmental court shall remain in force. A statement to that 
effect shall be included in the decision of the Superior 
Environmental Court. 
 
Section 3 
Separate appeals may be made against decisions 
delivered by environmental courts concerning matters referred to 
in chapter 22, section 14 and chapter 7, section 21 of the Act 
(1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning Water 
Operations. Appeals against decisions referred to in chapter 7, 
section 12 second paragraph of the Act (1998:812) Containing 
Special Provisions concerning Water Operations may only be made 
in connection with an appeal against a judgment or final decision in 
the application case. 
 


--- PAGE 109 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
126 
Section 4 
Where appropriate, the Superior Environmental 
Court may instruct one or more members of the court to carry out 
an on-site inspection. The court shall notify the parties by suitable 
means of the time when the inspection is to take place. A record 
shall be made of the inspection. 
A judgment or decision of the Superior Environmental Court 
must not be based on a study relating to technical characteristics 
performed by an environmental adviser unless the parties have been 
given an opportunity to comment on it. However, this shall not 
apply where the findings of the study only differ slightly from 
previous evidence in the case. 
 
Section 5  
Where the applicant appeals against the judgment 
or decision of an environmental court in a application case 
concerning which a notice was published pursuant to chapter 22, 
section 3, the Superior Environmental Court may, instead of 
issuing an order for service of the notice on the opposite parties, 
decide that a copy of the appeal shall be sent to the keeper or 
keepers of the file appointed by the environmental court and issue 
a notice concerning the appeal. 
Such a notice shall state: 
1. that a copy of the documents in the case will be made available 
by the keeper or keepers of the file; 
2. that summonses and other communications in the case to the 
parties shall, unless they are sent separately to a party, be inserted 
in a specified local newspaper or newspapers and shall be made 
available by the keeper or keepers of the file; 
3. that a reply shall be submitted to the Superior Environmental 
Court within the period fixed by the court, which shall be not less 
than three weeks after publication of the notice. 
The notice shall be inserted in the local newspaper or newspapers 
selected by the environmental court for communications in the 
case. 
The notice shall be deemed to have been served when the 
directions laid down in this section have been complied with. 
 
Section 6  
A case in which an appeal is made against the 
judgment may be decided by the Superior Environmental Court 
without a main hearing or oral hearing, where such a hearing would 
not affect the judicial examination. However, where the parties and 
opposite parties request a main hearing or an oral hearing, such a 
hearing shall be held unless it is obviously unnecessary. 


--- PAGE 110 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
127
In a main hearing the Superior Environmental Court may 
arrange for the facts of the case to be presented to the extent it 
finds appropriate. 
If the Superior Environmental Court finds it necessary, in 
reviewing an appeal in a application case, to impose a prospective 
fine or other penalty on any of the parties for failure to appear, the 
injunction shall not be communicated to the party by a notice 
referred to in section 5 but shall be served upon him. 
 
Section 7 
In other respects, chapter 21, section 7 and 
chapter 22, sections 12, 21 and 23 to 28 of this Code and chapter 7, 
sections 5 and 7 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations shall be applicable to 
application cases tried by the Superior Environmental Court. The 
Superior Environmental Court may rule that a permit for an 
activity granted by the environmental court may be used even 
where the judgment has not gained legal force. Chapter 22, section 
28 first paragraph shall be applicable to such a ruling. 
Proceedings in the Supreme Court 
Section 8 
Appeals may not be made against judgments and 
decisions of the Superior Environmental Court in cases which in 
the first instance were tried by a municipality or an administrative 
authority. 
 
Section 9  
Appeals against judgments or decisions of the 
Superior Environmental Court may be made to the Supreme 
Court, unless other provision is made. 
The provisions of sections 5 and 6 and the first sentence of section 
7 concerning proceedings in the Superior Environmental Court 
shall be applicable to proceedings in the Supreme Court. 
 


--- PAGE 111 ---

 
129
Chapter 24. Validity and reviews etc. of permits 
Consequences of judgments and decisions delivered pursuant to 
the Environmental Code 
Section 1  
If a judgment or decision delivered in an 
application case referred to in chapter 21, section 1 (1) of this 
Code or chapter 7, section 1 of the Act (1998:812) Containing 
Special Provisions concerning Water Operations that relates to a 
permit for an activity governed by this Code has gained legal force, 
the permit shall be valid against all other parties as far as the 
matters examined in the judgment or decision are concerned. The 
same 
shall 
apply 
to 
decisions 
concerning 
permits 
for 
environmentally hazardous activities taken by municipalities or 
county administrative boards pursuant to chapter 9, section 8 and 
decisions taken by county administrative boards concerning 
permits for land drainage pursuant to chapter 11. Permits relating 
to the erection of water structures shall provide the right to retain 
the structure. However, pursuant to this chapter, chapter 7, 
sections 20 and 22, chapter 9, section 5 and chapter 10, section 12 
of this Code or chapter 2, section 10 and chapter 7, sections 13 to 
17 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning 
Water Operations, the scope of permits may be restricted, they 
may be altered or new conditions may be attached, or they may be 
withdrawn and further activity prohibited. Such measures may also 
be implemented by means of a summary order or prohibition 
pursuant to chapter 26, section 9 fourth paragraph. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term ‘permit’ shall also 
include approval of work or measures referred to in chapter 11, 
section 16. 
Judgments and decisions revising the terms of permits shall have 
the same effect as judgments and decisions granting permits. 
 
Section 2  
A permit shall lapse if the holder fails to comply 
with the conditions attached to the relevant judgment or decision 
concerning the time limit for completion of the works or the time 
limit for commencement of the activity. 


--- PAGE 112 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
130 
If the holder of the permit shows that he has valid reasons for 
the delay or that substantial damage would be caused if the permit 
were to lapse, the supervisory authority may extend the period of 
validity by not more than ten years. The supervisory authority may 
impose any new or stricter conditions that are reasonable under the 
circumstances. Applications for extension shall be made before 
expiry of the appointed period. 
 
Section 3  
The licensing authority may withdraw a permit, 
exemption or approval granted pursuant to this Code or to rules 
issued in pursuance thereof, wholly or in part, and prohibit further 
activity: 
1. where the applicant for the permit, exemption or approval has 
misled the licensing authority by supplying incorrect information 
or omitting to supply information that is relevant to a permit, 
exemption or approval or to the conditions attached thereto; 
2. where a permit, exemption or approval that relates to the 
activity or measure is not complied with and the discrepancy is not 
inconsiderable; 
3. where the activity or measure causes significant adverse effects 
which were not anticipated when the permit was granted for the 
activity or measure; 
4. where conditions have arisen due to the activity or measure 
which make it necessary to prohibit the activity in accordance with 
chapter 2, section 9; 
5. where the activity is discontinued; 
6. where a new permit replaces a previous permit; 
7. where it is necessary for fulfilment of Sweden’s obligations as 
a Member State of the European Union; 
8. where the maintenance of a water structure is seriously 
neglected; or 
9. where a permit to alter water conditions has not been used for 
a long time and it is not likely that it will be used again. 
Where a permit relates to the operation of a water structure, or 
in cases referred to in first paragraph points 8 or 9, the 
environmental court may withdraw the right to retain a water 
structure. 
 
Section 4  
In connection with a decision to withdraw a right 
pursuant to section 3 second paragraph that relates to a water 
structure, the environmental court may order the person 
responsible for maintenance of the structure to remove it and take 


--- PAGE 113 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
131
any measures that are necessary to prevent or mitigate any damage 
caused by removal. 
Instead of issuing an order pursuant to subsection (1), the 
environmental court may allow another party whose right depends 
on the removal of the water structure or, in order to protect public 
interests, the state, a municipality or a water association, to remove 
the structure at the expense of the person responsible for 
maintenance. The court may also issue an order in accordance with 
chapter 11, section 20. In that case, chapter 11, section 20 fourth 
paragraph and section 21 shall be correspondingly applicable. 
 
Section 5  
In the case of environmentally hazardous activities 
or water operations the licensing authority may revise a permit 
with respect to the rules concerning the permissible volume of 
production or similar rules concerning the scope of the activity and 
alter or cancel conditions or other rules, or issue new rules: 
1. when ten years, or the shorter period fixed by the 
Government or the authority appointed by the Government in 
consequence of Sweden’s membership of the European Union, 
have elapsed since the decision granting a permit entered into 
force; 
2. where the activity is responsible to a significant extent for an 
infringement of an environmental quality standard; 
3. if the applicant for the permit has misled the licensing 
authority by supplying incorrect information or omitting to supply 
information that was relevant to the permit or the conditions; 
4. if the terms of the permit that relates to the activity or 
measure have not been complied with; 
5. if the activity causes any significant damage that was not 
anticipated when the permit was granted; 
6. if the conditions in the surrounding area have changed 
significantly; 
7. if a significant improvement in terms of human health or the 
environment can be achieved by the use of a new process or 
treatment technology; 
8. if the use of a new technology for measuring or estimating 
pollution levels or other environmental impacts would significantly 
improve the possibility of controlling the activity; 
9. if the activity takes place, entirely or to a significant extent, in 
an area subject to a prohibition imposed by a rule or decision 
issued pursuant to chapter 9, section 4; 
10. in order to improve the safety of a structure; or 


--- PAGE 114 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
132 
11. if it becomes evident that measures taken or conditions laid 
down in order to protect fishing pursuant to chapter 11, section 8 
or to chapter 6, section 5 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations are not appropriate. 
Extraction permits may be withdrawn, wholly or in part, or new 
conditions may be attached thereto ten years after entry into force. 
If it becomes evident that the conditions attached to the permit are 
insufficient to mitigate the adverse effects on the natural 
environment, they may be altered before expiry of the period 
mentioned in the first sentence. 
In cases referred to in the first paragraph point 5, the licensing 
authority may also adopt any other measures that are necessary to 
prevent or mitigate adverse effects in the future. 
The licensing authority must not impose conditions or other 
rules pursuant to this section that are so intrusive that the activity 
can no longer be pursued or is significantly hampered. 
 
Section 6 
If conditions are imposed for two or more 
environmentally hazardous activities pursuant to chapter 16, 
section 8, and if the permit is withdrawn or the conditions revised 
in the case of one of the activities, the conditions applying to the 
other activities may also be reviewed. 
 
Section 7 
Applications for reviews referred to in sections 3 
to 6 may be submitted to an environmental court by the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Legal, Financial and 
Administrative Services Agency and the competent county 
administrative board. Where a matter is to be dealt with by an 
authority other than a court of law or a municipality, it may be 
submitted without an application. 
 
Section 8 
The licensing authority may, at the request of the 
holder of a permit, cancel or alter rules and conditions in a 
judgment or decision granting a permit other than those relating to 
the compensation amount. However, conditions may be cancelled 
or made more lenient only if they are obviously no longer 
necessary or are more stringent than necessary, or if the alteration 
is justified in view of circumstances that were not anticipated when 
the permit was granted. 
 
Section 9 
Chapter 7, sections 13 to 16 of the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations 


--- PAGE 115 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
133
contains further provisions concerning the revision of water 
operations. 
 
Section 10 
If, in connection with its examination of an 
activity, the Government lays down a specific condition for a 
permit, the licensing authority must not, without permission from 
the Government, depart significantly from that condition when 
reviewing the permit. 
Changes of circumstances in associations 
Section 11 
Chapter 7, sections 17 and 18 of the Act 
(1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning Water 
Operations 
contains 
provisions 
relating 
to 
changes 
of 
circumstances in associations. 
Unforeseen adverse effects of game enclosures 
Section 12 
County administrative boards may adopt new or 
altered conditions where a game enclosure causes adverse effects 
that were not anticipated when the permit was granted. If the 
adverse effects are significant and cannot be remedied, the permit 
may be withdrawn. A permit may also be withdrawn if the game 
enclosure to which it relates is no longer necessary. 
Unforeseen damage 
Section 13  
If a water operation or a water structure executed 
in accordance with a permit granted pursuant to this Code causes 
damage that was not anticipated by the environmental court when 
the permit was granted, the injured party may submit a claim for 
compensation pursuant to chapter 31. 
Where a private individual or a public interest suffers substantial 
loss, the operator may be required, at his own expense, to alter the 
water operation or the water structure, without causing damage to 
third parties or significant inconvenience to the permit holder, in 
such a way as to prevent or mitigate future damage. Where public 
interests are at stake, actions shall be brought by the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Legal, Financial and 


--- PAGE 116 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
134 
Administrative Services Agency, county administrative boards or 
municipalities. 
Claims relating to unforeseen damage shall only be considered if 
they are presented to an environmental court within five years or 
the longer period, up to twenty years, that may have been fixed in 
connection with the granting of the permit. The time shall be 
calculated from the end of the time limit fixed by the court for 
completion of the works. 
However, in the case of damage referred to in chapter 7, section 
7 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning 
Water Operations, claims must not be presented earlier than two 
years from the date when the damage was caused. 
The Limitation of Claims Act (1981:130) shall not be applicable 
to claims made pursuant to this section. 
 
Section 14  
Claims referred to in section 13 shall be made in 
writing and submitted to the environmental court in triplicate. One 
copy shall be delivered to the permit holder. 
The claim shall be examined before or after expiry of the period for 
submission of claims. Chapter 7, sections 8 to 12 of the Act 
(1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning Water 
Operations shall be applicable to this procedure. The provisions of 
chapter 22, sections 23 and 28 second and third paragraph shall also 
be applicable. 
 


--- PAGE 117 ---

 
135
Chapter 25. Litigation costs and similar costs 
Litigation costs in the courts etc. 
Section 1 
The provisions of the Code of Judicial Procedure 
relating to litigation costs shall not be applicable to cases relating 
to environmentally hazardous activities. 
 
Section 2  
In application cases relating to water operations, 
with the exception of those mentioned in the second paragraph, 
and cases referred to in chapter 21, section 1 second paragraph, 
applicants shall be liable for their own and the opposite parties’ 
costs in environmental courts. In cases relating to the 
establishment of associations for land drainage, irrigation or water 
regulation, applicants shall not be liable for the costs incurred by 
the members of the association in a county administrative board or 
an environmental court. Organizations referred to in chapter 16, 
section 13 shall not be entitled to compensation for, or obliged to 
pay, litigation costs. 
In cases referred to in the first sentence of the first paragraph 
which have resulted in an appeal, applicants shall be liable for their 
own costs in higher courts and for the costs incurred by the 
opposite parties as a result of the applicant’s appeal. 
 
Section 3 
In cases involving the withdrawal of a permit, 
prohibition of further activity or a review referred to in chapter 24, 
sections 3 to 6 or chapter 7, section 15 of the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations, the 
Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, the Legal, Financial 
and Administrative Services Agency, the county administrative 
board and the permit holder shall be liable for their costs in the 
environmental court. In cases referred to in chapter 24, section 5 
relating to reviews of permits for the purpose of safeguarding 
public interests, the authority which requested the review shall also 
be liable for the costs incurred in the environmental court by 
opposite parties other than the permit holder. However, this shall 
not apply to permit reviews referred to in chapter 24, section 5 first 
paragraph point 11. Nevertheless, in cases arising out of chapter 24, 


--- PAGE 118 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
136 
section 5 first paragraph, point 10, concerning reviews for the 
purpose of improving the safety of a structure, the permit holder 
shall be liable for the aforementioned costs and not the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Legal, Financial and 
Administrative Services Agency or the county administrative 
board. 
 
Section 4 
In cases relating to reviews on account of a change 
of circumstances in associations referred to in chapter 7, section 17 
of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning 
Water Operations as regards membership or allocation of costs, or 
in chapter 7, section 18 of that Act, each party shall bear his own 
costs. 
 
Section 5 
The provisions of sections 2 to 4 shall not apply 
where they conflict with the provisions of chapter 18, section 6 or 
8 of the Code of Judicial Procedure. 
As regards specific matters in permit application cases relating to 
water operations each party may, to the extent reasonable, be 
ordered to bear his own costs, or the losing party may be ordered 
to pay the costs of the other parties. 
 
Section 6 
If, in a case arising out of chapter 31, section 13, 
an action brought by the owner of the property or any holder of 
special rights thereto for compensation or compulsory purchase is 
dismissed, the environmental court may, where the party who 
brought the action had reasonable cause to have his case tried by 
the court, rule that the opposite party shall pay the litigation costs 
of the owner of the property or any holder of special rights thereto 
or that each party shall be liable for his own costs. 
 
Section 7 
In cases relating to water operations the applicant 
may be required to pay the opposite parties’ litigation costs even 
where the court has not delivered a final decision on their suit. The 
compensation shall include interest pursuant to section 6 of the 
Interest Act (1975:635) from the date of the decision until final 
payment is made. 
 
Section 8  
In application cases the applicant shall pay the 
environmental court’s costs in respect of: 
1. notices; 
2. keepers of files; 


--- PAGE 119 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
137
3. experts summoned by the court; and 
4. premises where meetings are held. 
The first paragraph shall also apply to application cases referred 
to in chapter 7, section 2 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations. In that case, the 
provisions of the first paragraph relating to the applicant shall be 
applicable to the claimant instead. 
The provisions of the first and second paragraph relating to the 
applicant or the claimant shall in higher courts apply to the 
appellant. 
Where the court so requires, an advance shall be payable on the 
compensation. 
 
Section 9  
The provisions relating to costs in compulsory 
purchase cases shall be applicable to litigation costs in cases 
referred to in chapter 32, section 11 and in chapter 31, section 10. 
However, where a demand for compulsory purchase is dismissed, 
the provisions of the Code of Judicial Procedure relating to 
litigation costs shall be applicable. 
If an action for an injunction against environmentally hazardous 
activities or for an injunction upon the party pursuing such 
activities to take the precautions referred to in chapter 21, section 4 
is dismissed because the defendant has, after the action was 
brought, applied for and been granted a permit pursuant to this 
Code, the court shall, depending on the circumstances, rule that 
each party shall bear his own litigation costs or that one of them 
shall be paid full or reduced compensation. 
Other costs 
Section 10 
Where a permit is granted for land drainage in 
cases referred to in chapter 7, section 19 of the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations, the 
applicant’s costs shall, to the extent reasonable, be shared between 
the participants in the land drainage project. If a permit for land 
drainage is not granted, the applicant shall pay the costs incurred 
unless, due to special circumstances, the liability for payment is 
shared between all or some of the parties. Where a permit for land 
drainage is not granted in an action brought pursuant to chapter 7, 
section 20 of the above Act following a decision in connection with 


--- PAGE 120 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
138 
reallotment, the costs shall be deemed to be service charges for the 
reallotment. 
 
Section 11  
In matters dealt with by the Government that 
relate to the harnessing of waterfalls pursuant to chapter 2, section 
9 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning 
Water Operations the applicant shall be liable for all costs. 
In matters relating to the allocation of compensation that are 
referred to a county administrative board, the party who is liable 
for compensation shall be liable for all costs.  
The first and second paragraph shall not apply where they 
conflict with the provisions of chapter 18, section 6 or 8 of the 
Code of Judicial Procedure.  
Matters relating to compensation mentioned in this section shall 
be examined by the environmental court. 
 


--- PAGE 121 ---

 
139
PART FIVE 
SUPERVISION ETC.
SUPERVISION ETC.
SUPERVISION ETC.
SUPERVISION ETC. 
Chapter 26. Supervision 
General provisions concerning supervision 
Section 1  
The purpose of supervision shall be to ensure 
compliance with the objectives of this Code and rules issued in 
pursuance thereof. 
For this purpose the supervisory authority shall, to the extent 
necessary, supervise compliance with the provisions of the 
Environmental Code and rules, judgments and other decisions 
issued in pursuance thereof and take any measures that are 
necessary to ensure that faults are corrected. 
The supervisory authority shall also contribute to attainment of 
the objectives of this Code by giving advice and information and 
similar activities. 
 
Section 2 
The 
supervisory 
authority 
shall 
report 
infringements of the provisions of this Code or rules issued in 
pursuance thereof to the police or public prosecution authorities 
where there are grounds for suspicion that an offence has been 
committed. 
 
Section 3  
Supervision shall be exercised by the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Surgeon-General of the 
Swedish Armed Forces, county administrative boards, other 
government agencies and municipalities (supervisory authorities) 
in accordance with the Government’s instructions. 
Provisions concerning supervision are also to be found in the 
Act (1999:381) on Measures to Prevent and Limit the 
Consequences of Major Chemical Accidents. 
Municipalities shall, through the committee or committees 
appointed by the council, exercise supervision in the municipality 
of environmental and health protection pursuant to chapter 9, with 


--- PAGE 122 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
140 
the exception of environmentally hazardous activities for which a 
permit is required, the handling of chemical products pursuant to 
chapter 14 and waste disposal pursuant to chapter 15. 
At the request of a municipality, the Government may provide 
that the supervisory authority appointed by the Government may 
in a certain respect delegate supervision which would otherwise 
have been exercised by a government supervisory authority to the 
municipality. This shall not apply to the activities of the Swedish 
Armed Forces, the National Fortifications Administration, the 
Defence Matériel Administration or the National Defence Radio 
Centre. (Law 1999:385) 
 
Section 4  
Where a municipality requests that supervision be 
delegated in accordance with section 3, the competent supervisory 
authority shall, if it does not agree that supervision should be 
delegated in accordance with the request, refer the matter to the 
Government for a decision where the municipality so requests, 
together with its own opinion. 
The supervisory authority may revoke the delegation of 
supervision to a municipality. If the Government took the decision 
to permit delegation of supervision, it shall take the decision to 
revoke it. 
 
Section 5 
The Government may decide that the provisions 
concerning supervision shall also apply to supervision of 
compliance with EC Regulations in the area of application of this 
Code. 
 
Section 6  
The supervisory authorities shall collaborate with 
each other and with government and municipal bodies which 
exercise supervision in certain areas or otherwise have tasks that are 
relevant to supervision. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules requiring the supervisory authorities to provide any 
information that is necessary to enable regional or national 
supervisory authorities to discharge their responsibility for 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation. 
 
Section 7  
A municipality may enter into an agreement with 
another municipality under which its supervisory tasks pursuant to 
this Code are carried out wholly or in part by the other 


--- PAGE 123 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
141
municipality. However, the municipality must not delegate the 
power to deliver a decision concerning this matter. 
A municipality may also, by agreement with another 
municipality, authorize employees in that municipality to decide a 
certain matter or related matters on its behalf; however, this shall 
not apply to cases referred to in chapter 6, section 34 of the Local 
Government Act. The provisions of chapter 6, sections 24-27 and 
35 of that Act relating to disqualification and notification of 
decisions to committees shall be applicable to persons who take 
such decisions. 
 
Section 8 
The supervisory authority that is responsible for 
supervision may instruct a person who is not employed by the 
authority to carry out an inspection of a structure required in 
accordance with a decision granting a permit. 
Injunctions and prohibitions 
Section 9  
A supervisory authority may issue any injunctions 
and prohibitions that are necessary in individual cases to ensure 
compliance with the provisions of this Code and rules, judgments 
and other decisions issued in pursuance thereof. 
The measures taken must not be more intrusive than necessary 
in individual cases. 
An injunction or prohibition shall be without prejudice to a 
decision or judgment concerning a permit in a application case that 
is legally valid pursuant to chapter 24, section 1. 
However, a decision or judgment granting a permit shall not 
prevent the supervisory authority from issuing summary orders or 
prohibitions where this is necessary in order to avoid health effects 
or serious damage to the environment. 
 
Section 10 
If a permit for a water operation lapses in 
accordance with chapter 24, section 2, the supervisory authority 
may order the permit holder to remove a structure built in 
accordance with the permit which may be detrimental to public or 
private interests. 
 
Section 11  
A supervisory authority may order a person who 
has fenced in an area that is of interest for outdoor recreation, or 


--- PAGE 124 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
142 
an adjacent area, to put up gates or other passages to allow access 
to an area to which the public has right of access. 
Where it is clear that the only purpose of the fencing is to 
exclude the public from the area, the owner may be ordered to 
remove it. The above provisions concerning fencing shall also apply 
correspondingly to ditches. 
 
Section 12 
Where an injunction was issued upon a previous 
owner of a property or a previous land leaseholder in the same 
capacity to remedy damage or detriment caused by their use of a 
property, building, structure or facility on another’s land pursuant 
to chapter 7, 8, 11 or 12, the supervisory authority may issue a 
similar injunction against a new owner or land leaseholder, where 
this is reasonable. 
 
Section 13 
If an injunction has been issued against the owner 
or tenant of a property or against both the owner and the tenant, 
the supervisory authority may, where the title or tenancy is 
transferred to another person, order the previous owner or tenant 
to state the name and address of the new owner or tenant without 
delay. 
Prospective fines 
Section 14 
Injunctions or prohibitions may be made subject 
to a penalty of a fine.  
Communications to registration authorities and their legal 
consequences 
Section 15  
If a supervisory authority issues an injunction or 
prohibition against the owner of a property, a land leaseholder or 
the owner of a building, structure or facility on another’s land, the 
authority may send the decision to the registration authority to be 
recorded in the real estate register. If the injunction is made subject 
to a periodic prospective fine, this shall also be recorded. The 
person who last applied for registration of title or of acquisition of 
a land leasehold shall, where the injunction or prohibition is not 
addressed to the applicant, be informed without delay of the record 
by the registration authority by registered letter. 


--- PAGE 125 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
143
Where the injunction or prohibition is recorded, it shall apply to 
any new owner of the property. If the new owner acquired the 
property by purchase, exchange or gift, he shall, where the 
property constitutes real estate or a land leasehold, be liable for the 
periodic prospective fine from the date of transfer of the title. A 
new owner of the property shall not be liable for any other 
prospective fine, but the supervisory authority may impose a new 
prospective fine on him. A periodic prospective fine that relates to 
a specified period may only be recovered from the person who was 
the owner at the start of the period. 
If a recorded injunction or prohibition is cancelled by a decision 
that has become final, the supervisory authority shall, where the 
measure to which the injunction related has been taken or where 
the purpose of the injunction or prohibition is no longer relevant, 
report this to the registration authority as soon as it is aware of this 
fact so that the record can be deleted. (Law 2000:228) 
 
Section 16 
If a property or land leasehold, or a building, 
structure or facility on another’s land, is transferred following an 
appeal against a decision referred to in section 15, the provisions of 
the Code of Judicial Procedure relating to the consequences of a 
transfer of the subject of a dispute and to the participation of a 
third party in proceedings shall be applicable. 
Execution and correction at the expense of the person at fault 
Section 17  
If an injunction or prohibition issued by a 
supervisory authority pursuant to sections 9 to 13 is not complied 
with, the Enforcement Service shall, at the request of the 
supervisory authority, enforce the decision. The decision may be 
enforced in accordance with the Enforcement Code. 
If a person commits an offence referred to in chapter 29, 
sections 1 to 4, 8, 9 and 10, the Enforcement Service may, at the 
request of the supervisory authority, offer special assistance in 
order to remedy the situation. The Injunction to Pay and 
Assistance Act (1990:746) contains provisions relating to such 
assistance. Appeals against decisions in such cases shall be made to 
an environmental court. 
 


--- PAGE 126 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
144 
Section 18  
Instead of requesting enforcement pursuant to 
section 17, the supervisory authority may decide that the fault shall 
be corrected at the expense of the person at fault. 
A decision requiring the person at fault to correct the fault at his 
own expense may be issued without a previous injunction or 
prohibition if the supervisory authority, in view of the risk of 
serious damage, considers it necessary for the fault to be corrected 
immediately or where other special reasons exist. 
Operators’ control and environmental reports 
Section 19  
Persons who pursue an activity or take a measure 
that is liable to cause detriment to human health or affect the 
environment shall continuously plan and monitor the activities in 
order to combat or prevent such effects. 
Persons who pursue such an activity or take such a measure shall 
also keep themselves informed, by carrying out investigations on 
their own initiative or by other means, about the impact on the 
environment of the activity or measure. 
At the request of the supervisory authority, a person who 
pursues such an activity shall submit proposals for control 
programmes or remedial measures to the authority. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may issue rules concerning controls. 
 
Section 20  
If a permit is required for an environmentally 
hazardous activity pursuant to chapter 9, section 6 first paragraph, 
the operator shall present an annual report to the supervisory 
authority which supervises the activity. This shall also apply to a 
person who is ordered to apply for a permit pursuant to chapter 9, 
section 6 second paragraph. The environmental report shall contain 
a statement of the measures taken to comply with the conditions 
laid down in a decision granting a permit and of the results of these 
measures. 
The Government or the authority appointed by the Government 
may stipulate that an environmental report shall contain a 
description of the environmental impact of the activity, including 
aspects other than those set out in the conditions attached to the 
decision granting the permit. Other information relating to the 
area of application of this Code and its objectives may also be 
required. 


--- PAGE 127 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
145
Even where a permit is not required for an activity, the operator 
may be required to submit an environmental report. 
Information and investigations 
Section 21 
A supervisory authority may order a person who 
pursues an activity or takes a measure that is governed by the 
provisions of this Code or rules issued in pursuance thereof to 
submit any information and documents to the authority that are 
necessary for the purposes of supervision. The same shall apply to a 
person who is otherwise required to mitigate any adverse effects of 
such activities. 
 
Section 22  
Persons who pursue activities or take measures 
that are liable to cause detriment to human health or affect the 
environment or who are otherwise obliged to mitigate any adverse 
effects of such activities must also carry out any investigations of 
the activity and its effects that are necessary for the purposes of 
supervision in cases other than those referred to in chapter 14, 
section 7. The same shall apply to a person who leases a building 
for residential or general purposes, where there is cause to assume 
that the state of the building may be deleterious to health. Where 
appropriate, the supervisory authority may decide that such an 
investigation shall be carried out by another and may appoint 
another to carry it out. 
The person who is required to carry out the investigation shall 
pay the cost of an investigation carried out by another person 
appointed for the purpose in the amount fixed by the supervisory 
authority. 
A prohibition against transferring the property in question or 
other property until the investigation is completed may be attached 
to the decision requiring the investigation. 
Nature wardens 
Section 23  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may appoint nature wardens to supervise 
compliance with the rules relating to areas, natural objects and 
plant and animal species that are issued pursuant to the provisions 


--- PAGE 128 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
146 
of chapters 7 and 8, chapter 11, section 14 and chapter 12, section 
6. 
Nature wardens may turn away persons found in places to which 
they do not have right of access pursuant to these rules. 
Nature wardens may confiscate hunting and fishing tackle, 
means of transport and other objects that may be relevant to an 
investigation of the offence, where they catch a person in the act of 
contravening a prohibition or rule issued pursuant to chapter 7, 
section 3, 5, 11, 12, 24 or 28, chapter 8, sections 1 to 3, chapter 11, 
section 14 or chapter 12, section 6, if the act is punishable pursuant 
to chapter 29. 
 
Section 24 
If a nature warden confiscates an object, he shall 
report it to the police or public prosecution authorities without 
delay. The officer who receives a report shall act as if he had made 
the confiscation himself. 
Other provisions 
Section 25 
A person who has been granted an exemption 
from rules relating to areas or natural objects issued pursuant to 
chapters 7 and 8 or chapter 11, section 14 must upon request 
present the decision granting exemption to a nature warden or a 
police officer when he is in an area to which the exemption applies. 
 
Section 26 
A supervisory authority may decide that a 
decision taken by it shall take effect immediately even if it is 
appealed against. 
 
Section 27  
Persons who have been involved in any matters 
arising out of this Code or who have carried out investigations 
referred to in the third sentence of section 22 first paragraph must 
not without prior authorization disclose or use the information 
they have acquired about commercial or operating conditions or 
matters relating to the national defence. 
With respect to public services, the provisions of the Secrecy Act 
(1980:100) shall be applicable instead of the above provisions. 
 


--- PAGE 129 ---

 
147
Chapter 27. Charges and fees 
Charges payable to public authorities 
Section 1  
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules imposing charges to cover the 
authorities’ costs in connection with the consideration of matters 
and supervision pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in 
pursuance thereof and with the consideration of matters and 
supervision for the purposes of compliance with EC Regulations in 
this area. Municipal councils may issue rules relating to such 
charges for services provided by municipal authorities. 
The Government may authorize an authority to decide that any 
decision taken by it to make a charge pursuant to this Code or to 
rules issued in pursuance thereof shall take effect immediately even 
if it is appealed against. 
Obligation to reimburse authorities’ costs 
Section 2 
The Government or the authority appointed by 
the Government may issue rules laying down an obligation to 
reimburse authorities’ costs. 
Chapter 10, section 11, chapter 25, section 8 and chapter 26, 
section 22 second paragraph also contain provisions concerning the 
obligation to reimburse authorities’ costs. 
 
Section 3 
Persons who are required to pay a charge or fee in 
accordance with rules issued pursuant to section 1 first paragraph 
or to reimburse costs pursuant to section 2 first paragraph or 
chapter 26, section 22 second paragraph shall give any information 
that is necessary for determination of the amount of the charge or 
reimbursement. The information shall be given to the authority 
appointed by the Government and shall contain the details required 
by the Government or, following government authorization, by 
the authority. 
 


--- PAGE 130 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
148 
Refuse collection charges 
Section 4  
Municipalities may issue rules concerning the 
payment of charges for the collection, transport, recycling and 
removal of waste that is arranged by them pursuant to this Code or 
to rules issued in pursuance thereof. The municipality shall decide 
whether the charges shall be paid to the municipality or to the 
operator of the refuse collection service. 
The Measures against Pollution from Ships Act (1980:424) 
contains provisions concerning charges for the disposal of waste 
from ships. 
 
Section 5  
The charges referred to in section 4 first paragraph 
shall be payable annually or on some other periodical basis. Where 
the charges relate to occasional collection, transport and removal, 
the municipality may decide that they shall be payable for each 
occasion. 
The charges shall not exceed the amounts that are sufficient to 
cover the necessary planning, capital and operating costs of refuse 
collection and disposal. The cost of using plant or equipment for 
purposes other than refuse collection shall be deducted from these 
costs. The charges may be collected in such a way as to encourage 
reuse, recycling or other environmentally sound waste disposal. 
If the municipality contracts refuse collection out to another 
operator, the charges may be calculated on the basis of the 
agreement between them, where the cost is not significantly higher 
than if the municipality were to operate the services itself. 
 
Section 6  
Charges referred to in section 4 first paragraph 
shall be payable according to the list of rates fixed by the municipal 
council. 
The list of rates shall contain a specification of the basis for the 
calculation of charges not included in the list. The principle 
referred to in section 5 shall be taken into account. 
The list of rates shall contain provisions specifying who is liable 
for the charges and to whom they are payable. 
Producer charges 
Section 7  
The Government and the municipalities or the 
authority appointed by the Government may issue rules requiring 


--- PAGE 131 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
149
producers to pay charges for the collection, transport and removal 
of waste arranged by the municipality. Such rules may relate to 
waste for which producers are responsible in accordance with rules 
issued pursuant to chapter 15, section 6.  
The charges may also cover the cost of providing information 
about waste disposal. 
The charges shall be payable to the municipality or the authority 
appointed by the Government. 
Community indemnity fees and fishing fees 
Section 8 
Chapter 6 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations contains provisions 
relating to community indemnity fees and fishing fees. 
 


--- PAGE 132 ---

 
151
Chapter 28. Access etc. 
Access to allow authorities to perform their tasks 
Section 1 
In order to perform their tasks pursuant to this 
Code, authorities and persons engaged by authorities to perform a 
task shall be given access to properties, buildings, other structures 
and means of transport for the purpose of carrying out 
investigations and taking other measures. Chapter 31, section 10 
contains provisions relating to the right to compensation for 
damage and intrusion. 
Access for the purpose of carrying out compensatory measures 
etc. 
Section 2  
If a person is required pursuant to chapter 7, 
section 7 fourth paragraph or chapter 16, section 9 to undertake 
investigations or compensatory or other measures on another’s 
property, building or other structure, the county administrative 
board may decide that he shall be granted access during a specified 
period. 
Persons who carry out such investigations or measures shall pay 
compensation for damage and intrusion. Actions for compensation 
shall be brought before an environmental court. 
Access for the purpose of investigating the effects of an activity 
Section 3  
A county administrative board may, where it is 
justified in the circumstances, decide that access shall be granted to 
another’s land during a specified period if a person who pursues or 
intends to pursue an activity or take a measure wishes to 
investigate the effects of the activity or measure by taking 
measurements or carrying out other investigations on the property. 
Persons who pursue or intend to pursue an activity or take a 
measure shall pay compensation for damage and intrusion. Actions 
for compensation shall be brought before an environmental court. 


--- PAGE 133 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
152 
The county administrative board may require the person who is 
to carry out the investigation to furnish a security for future 
compensation claims before the work starts. If a security is 
furnished, the county administrative board may decide that the 
work may start even where an appeal has been made against the 
decision permitting access. 
Access for the purposes of preventive and remedial measures 
Section 4  
If a person who pursues or intends to pursue an 
activity or take a measure is ordered to take any precautions and 
protective measures on another’s land, building or other structure 
that are necessary in order to prevent or mitigate the damage 
caused by the activity, the county administrative board may decide 
that access may be granted during a specified period to a property 
or structure that is owned or possessed by another person in order 
to carry out such measures there. 
Persons who take precautions or protective measures shall pay 
compensation for damage and intrusion. Compensation actions 
shall be brought before an environmental court. If a decision 
allowing access is delivered in a case relating to a permit for a water 
operation, the matter of compensation shall be examined in the 
case. 
Access for the purposes of after-treatment 
Section 5  
A county administrative board may decide to 
permit access during a specified period to a property, building or 
other structure if a person other than the owner or possessor is 
required to remediate polluted areas there or carry out 
investigations for the purposes of such after-treatment. 
Persons who carry out such measures shall pay compensation for 
damage and intrusion unless the owner of the property or holder of 
special rights thereto is himself liable for the costs of the measures. 
Compensation actions shall be brought before an environmental 
court. 
 


--- PAGE 134 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
153
Obligation to exercise due care 
Section 6  
Measures referred to in sections 1 to 5 shall be 
carried out in such a way as to cause the least possible damage and 
intrusion. 
Dwellings may only be entered to the extent necessary to 
prevent or eliminate adverse effects on health. 
Prohibition against displacing equipment 
Section 7 
If it is necessary to install measuring apparatus or 
similar equipment in connection with an investigation referred to 
in sections 1 to 5, an injunction against displacing or damaging the 
equipment may be issued subject to a penalty of a fine. The same 
shall apply where it is necessary to install pumping or similar 
equipment. 
Police assistance 
Section 8 
The police authorities shall give any assistance 
that is necessary for the purposes of access and measures referred 
to in sections 1 to 5. 
Access to water level gauges etc. 
Section 9  
Persons who are dependent on the performance of 
a water operation, public prosecutors and officials of the Swedish 
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute shall have right of 
access to places where water level gauges, water meters or 
observation tubes are installed and the right to see the records of 
water levels, drainage or the quantities of water utilized which the 
operator is required to keep. 
Officials of the National Board of Fisheries and fishing 
supervisors appointed for the purpose shall be given the 
opportunity to supervise compliance with any measures designed 
to protect fishing. 
 


--- PAGE 135 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
154 
Special right of coercion for water operations 
Section 10  
Persons who pursue or intend to carry on water 
operations may be authorized by an environmental court to build 
structures or take measures on properties that belong to another 
and may use land for this purpose in the case of: 
1. water operations managed by the state, a municipality or a 
water management association that are beneficial to human health 
or the environment or are calculated to promote fishing; 
2. water operations designed to counteract pollution caused by 
wastewater; 
3. water operations involving the utilization of surface water or 
groundwater; 
4. water regulation; 
5. water operations relating to a public navigation channel or 
port; or 
6. land drainage. 
An area that is used in accordance with the first paragraph may 
be compulsorily purchased if it is destined to form part of a 
property to which a hydropower development right is attached. 
Upon termination of the right provided by this section to use 
another’s land without possession of title thereto, any structures 
that are erected or located on the land shall fall to the landowner 
without charge if they are not removed within one year of 
termination. 
Access for the purpose of maintaining a water operation  
Section 11  
Persons who are required to maintain a water 
operation shall be entitled to use another’s land for any works or 
measures that are necessary in order to comply with the 
maintenance obligation. 
The person liable for maintenance shall pay compensation for 
damage and intrusion. Actions for compensation shall be brought 
before an environmental court. 
Right to use another’s water structure 
Section 12  
Unless it causes significant inconvenience to the 
owner of a water structure, another person may be granted the 
right to alter the structure or use it for his own water operations or 


--- PAGE 136 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
155
to prevent or mitigate the damage caused by his own water 
operations. If the water structure is to be altered, the owner shall 
be entitled to make the alteration and receive reimbursement of his 
costs. 
A person who is granted the right to use a water structure shall 
pay the owner of the structure reasonable compensation for this 
right. 
Prohibition of fishing 
Section 13 
Fishing may be prohibited in a specific area 
following a decision introducing measures to promote fishing or to 
prevent damage to fishing. 
 


--- PAGE 137 ---

 
157
PART SIX 
PENALTIES
PENALTIES
PENALTIES
PENALTIES 
Chapter 29. Penalty provisions and forfeiture 
Section 1  
Any person who deliberately: 
1. pollutes land, water or air in a manner which involves or is 
liable to involve risks for human health or detriment to flora and 
fauna that are not inconsiderable or other significant detriment to 
the environment; 
2. stores waste or other matter in a manner which may give rise 
to health risks, damage or other detriment referred to in point 1 as 
a result of pollution; or 
3. causes substantial detriment to the environment as a result of 
noise, vibration or radiation  
shall, unless a competent authority has permitted the practice or it 
is generally accepted, be liable to a fine or a term of imprisonment 
not exceeding two years for environmental offence. 
If the offence is serious, the penalty shall be a term of 
imprisonment of not less than six months nor more than six years. 
When the seriousness of the offence is considered, special attention 
shall be paid to whether it caused, or might have caused, lasting 
damage on a large scale or whether the act was otherwise of a 
particularly dangerous nature. 
If the act may be deemed to be justifiable in view of the 
circumstances, no penalty shall be imposed pursuant to this 
section. 
 
Section 2 
Any person who commits an offence referred to 
in section 1 through negligence shall be liable to a fine or a term of 
imprisonment not exceeding two years for the offence of causing 
environmental disturbance. 
 
Section 3  
Any person who, whether deliberately or through 
gross negligence, handles a chemical product or a product that 
contains or is treated with a chemical product without taking any 
protective measures, considering an alternative product or taking 
any other precautions that are necessary in view of the product’s 


--- PAGE 138 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
158 
intrinsic characteristics in order to prevent or combat damage to 
human health or the environment shall be liable to a term of 
imprisonment not exceeding two years for the offence of 
environmentally hazardous handling of chemicals. 
No penalty shall be imposed pursuant to the first paragraph if 
the act is punishable in accordance with section 1 or section 2. 
 
Section 4  
Any person who, whether deliberately or through 
negligence, starts or pursues an activity or takes some other 
measure without obtaining a decision concerning permissibility or 
a permit, approval or consent or without submitting a notification 
required by this Code or by rules issued in pursuance thereof shall 
be liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years for the 
offence of unauthorized environmental activity. 
The same shall apply to failure to comply, whether deliberately 
or through negligence, with a condition attached to a decision 
concerning permissibility or a permit, approval or exemption taken 
pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in pursuance thereof or in 
connection with a review of such permits or conditions. 
No penalty shall be imposed in accordance with the first and 
second paragraph if the act is punishable in accordance with section 
1 or section 2. 
 
Section 5 
Any person who, contrary to the provisions of 
this Code or to rules issued in pursuance thereof, omits, whether 
deliberately or through negligence, to submit notification or 
information or supplies incorrect information, thus hindering a 
permit application procedure, shall be liable to a term of 
imprisonment not exceeding two years for the offence of 
obstruction of environmental control. 
 
Section 6 
Any person who, whether deliberately or through 
negligence, in cases other than those mentioned in section 5: 
1. omits to submit a document that is required by this Code or 
by rules issued in pursuance thereof, or submits incorrect 
information or omits information; or 
2. omits to comply with the obligation laid down in the Code or 
in rules issued in pursuance thereof to label a product containing or 
consisting of genetically modified organisms or a chemical product, 
a biotechnical organism or a product that contains or is treated 
with a chemical product 


--- PAGE 139 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
159
shall, where the act or omission is likely to impede an assessment 
of the risk of damage to human health or the environment, be liable 
to a fine or a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year for the 
offence of incomplete environmental information. 
 
Section 7 
Any person who, whether deliberately or through 
negligence, leaves litter outdoors in a place to which the public has 
access or which is within its view shall be liable to a fine or a term 
of imprisonment not exceeding one year for the offence of littering. 
 
Section 8  
Any person who infringes any of the following 
provisions, whether deliberately or through negligence, shall be 
liable to a fine or a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years: 
1. rules for the total defence issued pursuant to chapter 1, 
section 5, where an infringement of the statutory provision from 
which a derogation is provided is punishable; 
2. restrictions on land use rights laid down in decisions 
concerning nature reserves or culture reserves pursuant to chapter 
7, section 5 second or third paragraph; 
3. the prohibition against pursuing activities or taking measures 
in a habitat protection area laid down in chapter 7, section 11; 
4. rules that are necessary for special protection of flora or fauna 
pursuant to chapter 7, section 12; 
5. a prohibition against erecting a new building or taking any 
other measure contrary to chapter 7, section 16 in a shore 
protection area; 
6. rules concerning precautions in environmental protection 
zones issued pursuant to chapter 7, section 20; 
7. rules imposing restrictions in water protection areas issued 
pursuant to chapter 7, section 22; 
8. a temporary prohibition imposed pursuant to chapter 7, 
section 24 first paragraph; 
9. rules imposing prohibitions for the protection of species of 
animals and plants issued pursuant to chapter 8, section 1 or 2; 
10. rules prohibiting or imposing special conditions for the 
release of animal or plant species issued pursuant to chapter 8, 
section 3; 
11. rules issued pursuant to chapter 8, section 4 by having any 
dealing with animals, plants, eggs, spawn, roe, nests or products of 
animals or plants contrary to such a rule or a condition stipulated 
in a decision in an individual case; 


--- PAGE 140 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
160 
12. rules or decisions prohibiting discharges of wastewater etc. 
issued pursuant to chapter 9, section 4; 
13. 
rules 
concerning 
precautions 
in 
connection 
with 
environmentally hazardous activities issued pursuant to chapter 9, 
section 5; 
14. restrictions, conditions or a notification requirement relating 
to an environmental hazard zone laid down pursuant to chapter 10, 
section 12; 
15. the obligation to maintain a water structure pursuant to 
chapter 11, section 17 first paragraph or section 20 first paragraph 
or 21 first paragraph ; 
16. the prohibition against starting an activity laid down in 
chapter 12, section 6 third paragraph; 
17. the prohibition laid down for the purpose of protecting the 
natural environment in chapter 12, section 6 fourth paragraph; 
18. 
rules 
concerning 
investigations 
and 
precautions 
in 
connection with genetic engineering issued pursuant to chapter 13, 
section 8 or section 11; 
19. the prohibition against spreading pesticides from aircraft laid 
down in chapter 14, section 18 second paragraph; 
20. the prohibition against spreading pesticides on deciduous 
brush laid down in chapter 14, section 19 first paragraph; 
21. rules relating to the trade in and combustion, transfer and 
importation of fuels issued pursuant to chapter 14, section 21; 
21 a. the prohibition against the offer for sale of petrol or diesel 
fuels pursuant to chapter 14 section 22,  
22. rules relating to the handling, importation and exportation of 
chemical products and biotechnical organisms issued pursuant to 
chapter 14, section 24; 
23. the prohibition against handling, importing or exporting 
chemical products and biotechnical organisms laid down in chapter 
14, section 25; 
24. the prohibition against the dumping or incineration of waste 
laid down in chapter 15, section 31; 
25. the obligation to notify or provide information pursuant to 
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2455/92 of 23 July 1992 concerning 
the export and import of certain dangerous chemicals, as last 
amended by Commission Regulation (EC) 237/97 of June 27 1997, 
or to provide information pursuant to Council Regulation (EEC) 
No 793/93 of 23 March 1993 on the evaluation and control of the 
risks of existing substances; 


--- PAGE 141 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
161
26. the prohibition against providing or the duty to provide 
information laid down in Council Regulation (EC) No 3093/94 of 
15 December 1994 on substances that deplete the ozone layer; 
27. provisions relating to transport by transporting waste 
contrary to Council Regulation (EEC) No 259/93 of 1 February 
1993 on the supervision and control of shipments of waste within, 
into and out of the European Community, as last amended by 
Council Regulation (EC) 120/97 of January 20 1997; 
28. a provision or condition laid down in an individual decision 
taken pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 
December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora 
by regulating trade therein, as last amended by Council Regulation 
(EC) 938/97 of May 26 1997, relating to imports into Sweden, 
exports and re-exports from Sweden, trade in artificially 
propagated plants, transportation and transit or purchases, sales or 
other commercial transactions. 
Attempts to commit offences against subsection (1), point 24 
shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of chapter 23 
of the Penal Code. 
No penalty shall be imposed in accordance with the first and 
second paragraph if the act is punishable in accordance with section 
1 or section 2. (Law 1999:1325) 
 
Section 9  
Any person who infringes any of the following 
rules, whether deliberately or through negligence, shall be liable to 
a fine or a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months: 
1. rules concerning public order issued pursuant to chapter 7, 
section 30; 
2. rules concerning the prohibition of animal husbandry issued 
pursuant to chapter 9, section 11; 
3. rules issued for the purpose of protecting human health or the 
environment pursuant to chapter 9, section 12; 
4. the notification requirement laid down in chapter 11, section 
15 third paragraph with respect to works that may be detrimental 
to fishing; 
5. rules concerning the management of agricultural land issued 
pursuant to chapter 12, section 8; 
6. rules limiting the number of animals on a holding etc. issued 
pursuant to chapter 12, section 10; 
7. the prohibition or rules concerning the removal of waste laid 
down in chapter 15, section 21 by collecting and removing waste 
professionally or otherwise on a large scale; 


--- PAGE 142 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
162 
8. rules concerning the removal of waste issued pursuant to 
chapter 15, section 25 first paragraph, point 2; 
9. new or altered conditions relating to game enclosures issued 
pursuant to chapter 24, section 12; 
10. the prohibition against fishing laid down in chapter 28, 
section 13; 
11. the obligation imposed by Council Regulation (EC) No 
338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild 
fauna and flora by regulating trade therein, as last amended by 
Council Regulation (EC) 938/97 of May 26 1997, to provide 
information in applications or other documents concerning matters 
relevant to permits or supervision. 
No penalty shall be imposed in accordance with the first 
paragraph if the act is punishable in accordance with section 1 or 
section 2. 
 
Section 10 
Any person who, without authorization, deals 
with specimens of an animal or plant species or eggs, spawn, roe or 
nests which he knows, or has reasonable grounds to assume, were 
obtained by an infringement of rules issued pursuant to chapter 8, 
section 1 or 2 shall be liable to a fine or a term of imprisonment not 
exceeding two years. 
 
Section 11  
No penalty shall be imposed for an offence 
referred to in sections 3 to 10 that is deemed minor. 
No penalty shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this 
chapter if the penalty for the offence provided in the Penal Code is 
the same or more severe or where the offence is punishable 
pursuant to the Penalties for Smuggling Act (1960:418). 
In the case of failure to comply with an injunction issued subject 
to a penalty of a fine, no penalty shall be imposed pursuant to the 
provisions of this chapter for an offence to which the injunction 
relates. 
 
Section 12  
Animals, plants and products extracted from 
animals or plants, chemical products, biotechnical organisms and 
products that contain chemical products or genetically modified 
organisms, as well as products containing or consisting of 
genetically modified organisms, which are involved in an offence 
referred to in sections 1 to 4, 6, 8, 9 or 10 may be declared 
forfeited, unless this is manifestly unreasonable. The same shall 


--- PAGE 143 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
163
apply to the value of the property or the proceeds of such an 
offence. 
Means of transport and other means used for the purposes of or 
involved in an offence referred to in sections 1 to 4, 8, 9 or 10 may 
be declared forfeited if this is necessary in order to prevent crime 
or otherwise in special circumstances. Instead of the means itself, 
its value, or part thereof, may be declared forfeited. 
 
Section 13 
A person who commits an offence referred to in 
section 8 first paragraph, point 24 shall be judged by a Swedish 
court of law notwithstanding that chapter 2, section 2 or 3 of the 
Penal Code is not applicable. Where the offence is committed in 
Sweden’s economic zone, an action may be brought before the 
district court whose circuit is nearest the scene of the offence. 
 
Section 14 
Where a person who incurs liability pursuant to 
section 1 or 2 voluntarily averts a danger or consequence 
mentioned in those provisions before significant detriment is 
caused may be sentenced to a more lenient penalty than that 
prescribed for the offence. 
 


--- PAGE 144 ---

 
165
Chapter 30. Environmental sanction charges 
Section 1  
A special charge (environmental sanction charge) 
shall be paid by any economic operator who in his business 
activities: 
1. neglects to comply with rules issued pursuant to this Code; 
2. commences an activity for which a permit must be obtained or 
notification submitted pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in 
pursuance thereof although a permit has not been granted or 
notification submitted; or 
3. neglects to comply with the terms of a permit or conditions 
laid down pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in pursuance 
thereof. 
However, this shall only apply to infringements for which the 
Government has imposed an environmental sanction charge 
pursuant to section 2. 
An environmental sanction charge shall also be payable where 
the infringement did not occur deliberately or through negligence. 
However, the charge shall not be payable where this is manifestly 
unreasonable. 
Environmental sanction charges shall accrue to the state. 
 
Section 2 
The Government shall issue rules concerning 
infringements for which environmental sanction charges are 
payable and the amounts to be paid for various infringements. The 
amounts shall be determined in relation to the seriousness of the 
infringement and the importance of the provision to which the 
infringement relates. 
The minimum environmental sanction charge shall be SEK 5,000 
and the maximum charge shall be SEK 1,000,000. 
 
Section 3 
Supervisory authorities shall decide matters 
relating to environmental sanction charges. 
Before the supervisory authority imposes an environmental 
sanction charge, the person who is liable for payment of the charge 
shall be given an opportunity to make a statement. 
 
Section 4 
The operator shall be notified of a decision to 
impose an environmental sanction charge. 
 


--- PAGE 145 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
166 
Section 5 
An environmental sanction charge shall be paid 
within thirty days of the date of the decision imposing it or within 
the period specified in the decision, if that is longer. 
A decision concerning an environmental sanction charge may, 
after the due date, be enforced as a judgment that has gained legal 
force. 
 
Section 6 
An environmental sanction charge shall not be 
collectible if the person who is liable for payment of the charge is 
not given the opportunity to make a statement within five years of 
the event mentioned in section 1 which gave rise to the decision. 
 
Section 7 
A person who is liable for payment of an 
environmental sanction charge pursuant to a decision taken by a 
supervisory authority may appeal against the decision to an 
environmental court. 
 
Section 8 
An environmental sanction charge that has been 
imposed shall lapse if the decision is not enforced within ten years 
of the date when it became final. 
 
Section 9  
An environmental sanction charge shall be 
refunded if liability for payment is annulled by a decision that has 
become final. 
Interest shall be payable on an environmental sanction charge 
that is refunded pursuant to the first paragraph in accordance with 
section 5 of the Interest Act (1975:635) for the period from the 
date of payment up to the date when it is refunded. 
 
Section 10 
The Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government may issue detailed rules concerning the payment of 
environmental sanction charges. 
 


--- PAGE 146 ---

 
167
PART SEVEN  
COMPENSATION ETC.
COMPENSATION ETC.
COMPENSATION ETC.
COMPENSATION ETC. 
Chapter 
31. 
Compensation 
in 
connection 
with 
public 
interventions and permit application procedures relating to 
water operation etc. 
Content of the chapter etc. 
Section 1 
This chapter shall be applicable to matters relating 
to compensation in connection with certain public interventions 
and the permit application procedure for water operations. It also 
contains provisions concerning compensation for loss suffered as a 
result of a prohibition against fishing. 
 
Section 2 
The 
provisions 
of 
the 
Expropriation 
Act 
(1972:719) shall be applicable to compensation and compulsory 
purchases referred to in this chapter, unless the Code contains 
provisions to the contrary. 
 
Section 3 
The provisions of this chapter that relate to 
properties shall also apply to special rights to properties. 
Compensation and compulsory purchase arising out of certain 
rules, injunctions and prohibitions 
Section 4  
Property owners shall be entitled to compensation 
following a decision to requisition land or where significant 
difficulties arise for current land use in the relevant part of the 
property, if the decision relates to: 
1. rules issued pursuant to chapter 7, section 3 concerning 
measures and restrictions with respect to national parks; 
2. rules issued pursuant to chapter 7, section 5, 6 or 9 concerning 
measures and restrictions with respect to nature reserves and 
culture reserves; 


--- PAGE 147 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
168 
3. prohibitions or decisions not to grant an exemption pursuant 
to chapter 7, section 11 second paragraph in a habitat protection 
area; 
4. rules issued pursuant to chapter 7, section 22 concerning 
measures and restrictions with respect to water protection areas; or 
5. injunctions or prohibitions issued pursuant to chapter 12, 
section 6 fourth paragraph that relate to a specific activity. 
Rules issued pursuant to chapter 7, section 3 concerning 
restriction of the right to hunt bears, lynxes, wolves, wolverines, 
elks or eagles shall not confer any right to compensation. 
 
Section 5  
If, in consequence of a decision referred to in 
section 4 first paragraph, points 1 to 4, a permit must be obtained 
for a certain activity or measure, compensation shall only be 
payable if a permit is refused or specific conditions are attached. 
Where a prohibition against taking a measure without 
permission is imposed pursuant to chapter 7, section 24 and 
permission is refused, section 4 first paragraph shall be applicable. 
 
Section 6 
Compensation referred to in section 4 shall be 
reduced by an amount corresponding to the extent to which the 
property owner is obliged to accept the measure without 
compensation. 
 
Section 7  
Compensation referred to in section 4 shall be 
paid by the state. Where rules referred to in section 4 are adopted 
by a municipality, the compensation shall be paid by the 
municipality instead. 
Where rules referred to in section 4 first paragraph, point 4 are 
adopted by a county administrative board following application by 
a municipality or the party in whose interests the water protection 
area was established, compensation shall be paid by the applicant. 
 
Section 8 
If, in a case referred to in section 4 first paragraph, 
substantial damage is caused in connection with the current use of 
the property, the property owner shall be entitled to compulsory 
purchase instead of compensation pursuant to section 4. Where the 
damage is due to a prohibition against taking a certain measure 
without permission, section 5 first paragraph shall be applicable. 
 
Section 9  
In connection with the application of sections 4 
and 8, account shall also be taken of other decisions taken pursuant 


--- PAGE 148 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
169
to chapter 7, section 3, 5, 6, 9 or 22, prohibitions imposed pursuant 
to chapter 7, section 11 second paragraph, injunctions and 
prohibitions issued pursuant to chapter 12, section 6 fourth 
paragraph, decisions taken pursuant to section 18 of the Forest 
Conservation Act (1979:429) and decisions referred to in chapter 
14, section 8 first paragraph of the Planning and Building Act 
(1987:10). In that case, the decisions must be issued within ten 
years of the last decision. The effects of measures taken pursuant 
to section 30 of the Forest Conservation Act during the same 
period in individual cases shall also be taken into account. 
If the right of appeal or the right to compensation or 
compulsory purchase lapses as a result of such a decision in 
consequence of the provisions of section 12 or 13 or corresponding 
provisions in the Planning and Building Act, this shall not prevent 
a decision being taken into account in accordance with the first 
paragraph. 
Compensation in connection with certain investigations 
Section 10  
Compensation for damage and intrusion suffered 
by a property owner on account of measures taken pursuant to 
chapter 28, section 1 shall be paid by the state. If the measures were 
taken by a municipality or by another person acting for the 
municipality, the compensation shall be paid by the municipality 
instead. 
Compensation referred to in the first paragraph shall not be 
payable where the measures are taken in connection with 
supervision of an activity that is pursued on the property. 
Compensation 
actions 
shall 
be 
brought 
before 
the 
environmental court in whose district the land, or the greater part 
of it, is situated. 
Compensation in connection with injunctions to provide 
passages through fencing 
Section 11  
Owners of fences who have installed a gate or 
other passage in response to an injunction issued pursuant to 
chapter 26, section 11 shall be entitled to compensation from the 
state for this work and for maintenance of the passage. However, 
no compensation shall be paid where it is clear that the only 


--- PAGE 149 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
170 
purpose of the fencing is to exclude the public from an area in 
which it would otherwise have been able to move freely.  
The first paragraph shall also apply where a crossing is provided 
over a ditch following an injunction issued pursuant to chapter 26, 
section 11. 
Notification of compensation claims 
Section 12 
Before an authority takes a decision concerning 
payment of compensation referred to in section 4, 5, 10 or 11, it 
may order a person who intends to submit a claim for payment or 
compulsory purchase to notify the claim and specify any other 
demands within a specified period, which shall be not less than two 
months, on pain of forfeiting the right to pursue the claim. 
The terms of any agreement or manifest understanding 
concerning compensation or compulsory purchase between the 
person liable for compensation and the claimant shall also be valid 
in relation to any person who acquires the claimant’s right to the 
property after the entitlement to payment arose. 
Compensation actions 
Section 13 
If 
no 
agreement 
is 
concluded 
concerning 
compensation referred to in section 4 or 11 or concerning 
compulsory purchase referred to in section 8, a person who wishes 
to claim compensation or demand compulsory purchase shall, 
unless the right to pursue the claim has been forfeited pursuant to 
section 12, bring an action before an environmental court against 
the person who is liable to pay compensation or purchase the 
property. Such an action shall be brought within one year from the 
date when the decision on which the claim is based has become 
final on pain of forfeiture of the right to compensation or payment 
for compulsory purchase. 
 
Section 14 
When provisions are contemplated pursuant to 
chapter 7, section 5, 6, 9 or 22, the person liable for compensation 
may bring an action before an environmental court against a 
claimant in order to establish the conditions for compensation or 
compulsory purchase if the provisions are issued. If provisions 
anticipated by the environmental court are not issued within a year 


--- PAGE 150 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
171
from the date when the judgment in the case gains legal force, the 
judgment shall no longer be binding upon the parties. 
Refund of compensation 
Section 15  
Where compensation referred to in section 4 is 
paid pursuant to existing rules or in consequence of the rejection of 
a permit application, the property owner may, if the rules are 
repealed, wholly or in part, or if a permit or exemption is granted, 
be required to refund the compensation, or part thereof, if this is 
reasonable in view of the benefit accruing to him as a result of the 
decision and any other circumstances. This shall also apply where a 
measure is taken contrary to such rules or to a decision not to 
grant a permit, if the supervisory authority decides not to demand 
redress. 
An action for the refund of compensation shall be brought 
before an environmental court within one year from the date when 
the decision on which the claim is based has become final and not 
later than ten years after payment of the compensation, on pain of 
forfeiture of the right to sue. 
Compensation and compulsory purchases in connection with 
permits for water operations 
Section 16  
A person who takes possession of another’s 
property under a permit issued in accordance with chapter 11 by 
compulsory acquisition or otherwise, or who takes a measure that 
damages such property, shall pay compensation for the value of the 
rights relinquished or for any damage caused, unless other 
provision is specifically made. Compensation shall also be payable 
for damage caused as a result of a prohibition against fishing 
imposed pursuant to chapter 28, section 13. 
Compensation shall only be paid for the damage remaining after 
preventive or remedial measures are taken by the permit holder. 
 
Section 17  
Properties and parts of properties that suffer great 
detriment due to an activity for which a permit has been granted 
pursuant to chapter 11 shall be compulsorily purchased if the 
owner so requests. 


--- PAGE 151 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
172 
The person liable for compensation shall be entitled to 
compulsory purchase if this only involves a slight increase in the 
compensation payable to the property owner and the latter does 
not have any valid interest in retaining the property or the part of 
the property at issue. In that case, the cost of measures referred to 
in section 16 second paragraph shall be included in the 
compensation. 
Damage to a permit-holder’s own property in connection with 
water operations 
Section 18  
If an activity for which a permit is granted 
pursuant to chapter 11 causes damage to a property belonging to 
the holder of the permit, compensation for the damage shall be 
determined. However, this shall not apply where consent is given 
by all the creditors who have a lien on the property. If the property 
is mortgaged jointly with another property, the property owner 
and the creditors must give the consent required for partial 
cancellation of a mortgage pursuant to chapter 22, section 11 of the 
Real Property Code. However, consent shall not be required from 
a person to whom the court’s decision is of no practical 
importance. 
Compensation in connection with removal of a water structure 
Section 19  
A person who is granted a permit for the removal 
of a water structure or is ordered or allowed to remove a water 
structure pursuant to chapter 24, section 4 shall pay reasonable 
compensation for any damage to the property of others that is 
caused by a permanent change in water conditions. Compensation 
for the loss of a benefit due to the removal shall only be payable 
where the benefit was guaranteed in the decision to grant a permit 
or in an agreement entered into in connection with the 
establishment of the structure. In that case, compensation shall 
only be payable for the costs incurred as a result of the loss of the 
benefit. 
If permission to remove a water structure is granted to a person 
other than the person who is responsible for maintaining the 
structure and if an order to pay compensation is issued in this 


--- PAGE 152 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
173
connection, the person liable for maintenance may apply for a 
refund of the compensation. 
Compensation following reviews of water operations 
Section 20  
Compensation for a loss or limitation of a right 
shall be payable where, following review of a permit pursuant to 
chapter 24, section 5 or chapter 7, section 13 or 14 of the Act 
(1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning Water 
Operations the person who holds a permit for the water operation 
to which the review relates suffers a loss of water or head or a 
limitation of the right to regulate water runoff, unless other 
provision is made in section 22. No compensation shall be payable 
to the extent that the loss or limitation represents an improvement 
of the safety of the water structure. 
Compensation shall be payable where a review of water 
operations pursuant to this Code or the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations causes 
loss to a person other than the permit holder whom the review 
concerns. However, users of cooperative power shall be subject to 
certain restrictions mentioned in chapter 8, section 4 of the Act 
(1998:812) Containing Special Provisions concerning Water 
Operations. 
Sections 16 to 18 shall be applicable to compensation referred to 
in the first and second paragraph. 
 
Section 21  
Compensation referred to in section 20 first 
paragraph shall be paid by the person who requested the review or, 
if a review referred to in chapter 7, section 14 of the Act (1998:812) 
Containing Special Provisions concerning Water Operations relates 
to permits for competing water catchments, by each of the permit 
holders. 
Compensation pursuant to section 20 second paragraph shall be 
paid: 
1. by the permit holder where the review is undertaken pursuant 
to chapter 24, section 5 or 8;  
2. by each of the permit holders where a review conducted 
pursuant to chapter 7, section 14 of the Act (1998:812) Containing 
Special Provisions concerning Water Operations relates to permits 
for competing water catchments; 
3. by the person who requested the review in other cases. 


--- PAGE 153 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
174 
Compensation for loss of cooperative power from a 
hydroelectric power station covered by the review shall be paid by 
the holder of the permit for the station. 
Limitation of the right to compensation following reviews of 
decisions concerning certain water operations  
Section 22  
Permit holders shall accept part of a loss or a 
limitation without compensation where it is a loss or limitation 
within the meaning of section 20 first paragraph and is due to a 
revised decision in favour of public fishing interests, a public 
navigation channel, a public port or health care or, in the case of 
reviews pursuant to chapter 24, section 5 or the first sentence of 
chapter 7, section 13 of the Act (1998:812) Containing Special 
Provisions concerning Water Operations, for the sake of general 
environmental protection. 
The proportion for which compensation shall not be payable 
shall correspond to the overall loss or limitation resulting from the 
reviews that have been conducted and from water operations 
referred to in section 23 and shall be: 
1. in the case of a hydroelectric power station: not more than 
one-fifth nor less than one-twentieth of the production value of 
the hydroelectric power which can be generated at the station 
under the terms of the existing permit after deduction of the 
proportion of that value that is the result of water regulations; 
2. in the case of water regulation for the purposes of power 
generation: not more than one-fifth nor less than one-twentieth of 
the production value of the hydroelectric power which can be 
generated at each station under the terms of the existing permit 
and which is the result of the regulation; 
3. in the case of other water operations: not more than one-fifth 
nor less than one-twentieth of the value of the quantity of water, 
head or reservoir volume specified in the permit for the operations. 
When an environmental court grants a permit for a water 
operation subject to this limitation of the right to compensation, 
the court shall determine the proportion for which compensation 
shall not be payable within the limits specified in the second 
paragraph, points 1 to 3. Account shall be taken in this connection, 
in particular, of the effects of the operations on water level and 
runoff conditions, the benefit or detriment that is likely to result 
from the operations from the point of view of public interest and 


--- PAGE 154 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
175
the benefit to the permit holder and the users of cooperative 
power. 
In the case of reviews carried out before the date specified in 
Chapter 24, section 5 first paragraph, point 1, the portion not 
eligible for compensation shall be reduced in proportion to the 
period remaining up to that date. 
 
Section 23  
The right to compensation shall be limited in the 
same manner as in section 22 where a person who holds a permit 
for water operations pursuant to this Code suffers a loss of water 
or head or a limitation of the right to regulate runoff due to the 
granting of a permit for a water operation for the benefit of public 
fishing interests, a public navigation channel, a public port, health 
care or general environmental protection. 
The above provisions shall also apply to a loss of head which is 
not harnessed. In that case, the proportion for which compensation 
shall not be payable shall correspond to one-twentieth of the value 
of the hydroelectric power of the waterfall after deduction of the 
proportion of that value that is the result of water regulation. 
Notification of payment of compensation in connection with 
permits for water operations  
Section 24 
For the purposes of this chapter, notification to the 
county administrative board shall only be required pursuant to 
chapter 6, section 4 of the Expropriation Act (1972:719) in the case 
of compensation for the compulsory purchase of land. 
Time limits for payment of compensation in connection with 
permits for water operations  
Section 25  
Where a permit is granted pursuant to chapter 11, 
compensation for land that has been compulsorily purchased shall 
be paid and notification submitted pursuant to chapter 6, section 4 
of the Expropriation Act (1972:719) within six months of the date 
of the final decision concerning the permit and compensation. 
Compensation other than that payable for compulsorily purchased 
land, which is to be paid as a lump sum, shall be payable within two 
years of the same date. If the party liable for compensation does 


--- PAGE 155 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
176 
not comply with this condition, he shall forfeit his right in relation 
to the person who is entitled to compensation. 
These time limits may be shortened or extended where the 
parties so agree or in special circumstances. 
Compensation determined after utilization of permits for water 
operations  
Section 26  
Where the amount of compensation relating to 
water operations or any other measure is finally determined only 
after use is made of the permit, the proportion of compensation in 
excess of the compensation previously determined shall be paid and 
notification submitted pursuant to chapter 6, section 4 of the 
Expropriation Act (1972:719) within one month of the final 
determination of the compensation. The same shall apply to 
compensation determined in connection with the approval of water 
operations that have already been completed. 
If the final compensation amount does not exceed the 
compensation previously determined and the person liable for 
compensation would otherwise have been required to pay a deposit 
or submit notification, he shall notify the county administrative 
board of the decision concerning compensation when it has 
become final. 
 
Section 27  
Interest calculated in accordance with section 5 of 
the Interest Act (1975:635) shall be payable upon compensation 
amounts referred to in section 26 first paragraph from the date 
when the land is taken into possession, the water operations 
commence or the measure is carried out, subject to the second 
paragraph. If payment is not made punctually, interest shall be 
payable in accordance with section 6 of the Interest Act for the 
period following the date on which the delay commenced. 
Interest shall be payable in accordance with section 6 of the 
Interest Act on compensation for unforeseen damage from the 
date when the claim was presented to the environmental court. 
If the person liable for compensation neglects to pay a 
compensation amount referred to in section 26 first paragraph that 
is payable by deposit, the county administrative board shall, at the 
request of the person who is entitled to the compensation or part 
thereof, sue for enforcement of the judgment or decision 
determining the compensation. 


--- PAGE 156 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
177
Finalization of compulsory purchases arising out of permits for 
water operations  
Section 28 
A compulsory purchase of land shall become final 
when the person liable for compensation discharges his obligations 
pursuant to chapter 6, sections 1 first paragraph and 4 of the 
Expropriation Act (1972:719). The compulsory purchase shall 
become final even where interest referred to in section 27 first 
paragraph has not been paid. 
The right to make use of a permit for water operations  
Section 29  
A person who is liable for compensation may 
make use of his permit by taking possession of the property or 
taking measures that cause damage to another after complying with 
the obligations laid down in chapter 6, sections 1 first paragraph 
and 4 of the Expropriation Act (1972:719). In that case, 
compulsory notification shall be limited in accordance with the 
provisions of section 24. 
Where necessary with regard to the circumstances of the person 
entitled to compensation, the environmental court may grant a 
reasonable delay before possession is taken or the measure is 
carried out. 
Refund of compensation arising out of permits for water 
operations  
Section 30 
Compensation amounts paid under the terms of 
permits referred to in chapter 11 shall not be recoverable. 
Nevertheless, repayment may be demanded where the permit on 
which the decision concerning compensation was based is cancelled 
at the suit of the person entitled to compensation. 
Other provisions 
Section 31  
The compensation referred to in this chapter shall 
be determined as a lump sum.  
However, compensation in cases referred to in section 5 second 
paragraph shall be paid at a fixed annual rate. In certain 
circumstances, the compensation may be deducted against any 


--- PAGE 157 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
178 
compensation which may be payable pursuant to section 4 first 
paragraph or section 8. 
In certain circumstances it may also be decided at the request of 
the person liable for or the person entitled to compensation that 
compensation payable in accordance with section 4 first paragraph 
or section 11 shall be paid at a fixed annual rate, subject to review 
in the event of a change in circumstances. 
Section 30 second paragraph of the Reindeer Husbandry Act 
(1971:437) shall be applicable to compensation payable pursuant to 
section 4 as a result of damage or detriment caused to reindeer 
husbandry. 
 
Section 32 
For the purposes of this chapter, the provisions of 
chapter 4, section 3 of the Expropriation Act (1972:719) shall be 
applicable to any rise in value during the period starting ten years 
before the action was brought before a court of law. 
 
Section 33  
Where a creditor who had a lien on a property 
when the right to compensation arose incurs loss because the 
compensation was not deposited with the county administrative 
board, he shall be entitled to compensation from the person so 
liable and upon receipt thereof shall write off the claim on the 
instrument of debt. The same shall apply where a creditor incurs 
loss because the amount of compensation is not determined or is 
too low and, following an agreement between the person liable for 
and the person entitled to compensation or for some other reason, 
the amount is not examined by a court of law. Compensation shall 
also be payable for loss due to an agreement providing for non-cash 
compensation or for the implementation of preventive or remedial 
measures. 
Actions for compensation pursuant to subsection (1) shall be 
brought before an environmental court. 
 
Section 34 
Where 
necessary, 
decisions 
concerning 
compensation shall include provisions to ensure that the recipient 
of compensation does not incur loss as a result of changes in 
monetary value during the period between the decision and 
payment of the compensation. 
 
Section 35 
When a compulsory purchase of land has been 
finalized, it shall be recorded in the real estate register. (Law 
2000:228) 


--- PAGE 158 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
179
 
Section 36 
In the event of disputes concerning better rights to 
compensation, the compensation amount shall be deposited with 
the county administrative board even where this is not compulsory 
pursuant to chapter 6, section 1 of the Expropriation Act 
(1972:719). The provisions of chapter 6, sections 17 to 19 of the 
Act shall be applicable to such deposits. 
 


--- PAGE 159 ---

 
181
Chapter 32. Compensation for certain kinds of environmental 
damage and other private claims 
Introductory provisions 
Section 1  
Compensation referred to in this chapter shall be 
payable for bodily injury, material damage and pecuniary loss 
caused by an activity pursued on a property. 
However, compensation for pecuniary loss that is not caused by 
a criminal offence shall only be payable where the loss is not 
inconsiderable. 
Compensation shall only be payable for damage that is not 
caused deliberately or through negligence where the disturbance 
that causes the damage is not acceptable in view of local conditions 
or of the extent to which such disturbance normally occurs in 
similar conditions. 
 
Section 2 
This chapter shall not apply to damage caused by 
ionizing radiation or the effects of electrical current from electrical 
installations to which separate provisions are applicable. 
Conditions for the payment of compensation 
Section 3  
Compensation within the meaning of this chapter 
shall be payable for damage caused by: 
1. pollution of water areas; 
2. pollution of groundwater; 
3. changes in the groundwater level; 
4. air pollution; 
5. land pollution; 
6. noise; 
7. vibration; or 
8. similar disturbances. 
The first paragraph, points 1 to 3 shall not be applicable to 
damage caused by activities pursued under the terms of a permit 
for water operations. Chapter 31 shall be applicable to such 
damage. 


--- PAGE 160 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
182 
Damage shall be deemed to have been caused by a disturbance 
referred to in the first paragraph where, in view of the nature of the 
disturbance and its adverse effects, other possible causes and any 
other circumstances, the balance of probability indicates that the 
disturbance was the cause. 
 
Section 4 
Compensation shall also be payable for damage 
caused by blasted rock or other objects that are blasted loose in 
connection with blasting works or other activities involving an 
increased risk of explosions. 
 
Section 5  
In cases other than those mentioned in section 3 
or 4, compensation shall be payable for damage caused by digging 
or similar works where the person who carried out the work or 
caused it to be carried out neglected to take preventive measures 
referred to in chapter 3, section 3 of the Real Property Code or was 
otherwise negligent in the performance of the work. 
If the work is particularly intrusive or involves special risks for 
some other reason, compensation for the damage caused thereby 
shall be payable even where the person who performed the work or 
caused it to be performed was not negligent. 
Persons liable for compensation 
Section 6  
Persons who pursue a harmful activity or cause it 
to be pursued in their capacity as property owners or land 
leaseholders shall be liable for compensation for damage pursuant 
to the provisions of this chapter. Any other person who pursues 
the harmful activity or causes it to be pursued and uses the 
property in his business activities or in public activities shall also be 
liable for compensation. 
If another person who uses the property pursues the harmful 
activity or causes it to be pursued, he or she shall be liable for 
compensation pursuant to this chapter only where the damage is 
caused deliberately or through negligence. 
 
Section 7 
Any person who, without being the owner, owner 
of the land leasehold or other user of the property, performs work 
on the property or causes it to be performed in his business activity 
shall also be liable for damages. 
 


--- PAGE 161 ---

Ds 2000:61 
 
 
 
183
Section 8  
Where two or more persons are liable for the same 
damage pursuant to this chapter, they shall be jointly and severally 
liable for compensation unless the liability for compensation of any 
one of them is limited. 
The amounts payable by persons who are jointly and severally 
liable for compensation shall, unless otherwise agreed, be shared 
between them as appears reasonable with regard to the grounds for 
liability, the extent to which they could have prevented the damage 
and any other circumstances. 
Compensation for future damage to property 
Section 9  
Where an estimate can reasonably be made in 
advance of compensation for damaged property, compensation 
shall be determined for future damage if one of the parties so 
requests. 
Where there is reasonable cause, a fixed annual compensation 
payment may be determined. If there is a change in circumstances 
after compensation is determined in this manner, the amount may 
be reduced to a level that is reasonable in view of the change. 
 
Section 10  
The Expropriation Act (1972:719) shall be 
applicable to reduction, allocation and payment of compensation 
for future damage to a property that is determined as a lump sum 
and is payable to the owner of the property or the owner of a land 
leasehold therein. The same Act shall also be applicable to the 
consequences of such reduction, allocation and payment. 
Where a creditor who has a lien on the property suffers loss 
because the compensation referred to in the first paragraph is 
calculated at a rate that is too low and, following an agreement 
between the person liable for and the person entitled to 
compensation or for some other reason, the amount is not 
examined by a court of law, the creditor shall be entitled to 
indemnification from the person liable for compensation and upon 
receipt shall write off the claim in this respect on the instrument of 
debt.  
 
 
 


--- PAGE 162 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
184 
Compulsory purchases of properties etc. 
Section 11  
If, as a result of an activity referred to in this 
chapter, a property becomes unprofitable to the owner, wholly or 
in part, or great detriment arises in connection with its use, the 
property, or part of it, shall be compulsorily purchased at the 
request of the owner by the person who pursues the activity. 
The first paragraph shall also be applicable where a person who is 
liable to carry out after-treatment pursuant to chapter 10 takes a 
measure as a result of which the property becomes unprofitable to 
the owner, wholly or in part, or great detriment arises in 
connection with its use. However, this shall not apply where the 
owner is also liable for after-treatment. 
The Expropriation Act (1972:719) shall be applicable to such 
compulsory purchases. Chapter 4, section 3 of the Act shall be 
applicable to any rise in value during the period starting ten years 
before an action is brought before a court of law. 
 
Section 12 
Apart from actions relating to compensation for 
damage and compulsory purchases, a private individual may also 
bring an action against a person who pursues or has pursued an 
environmentally hazardous activity without permission for 
prohibition of further activity or for the taking of protective 
measures or other precautions. 
 


--- PAGE 163 ---

 
185
Chapter 
33. 
Environmental 
damage 
insurance 
and 
environmental clean-up insurance 
Section 1  
Environmental 
damage 
insurance 
and 
environmental clean-up insurance, the terms of which are approved 
by the Government or the authority appointed by the 
Government, shall be available for the payment of compensation in 
certain cases to persons who suffer loss referred to in chapter 32 
and of any costs arising out of the application of chapter 26, 
section 17 or 18, where the costs relate to environmentally 
hazardous 
activities. 
Persons 
who 
pursue 
environmentally 
hazardous activities for which a permit must be obtained or 
notification submitted pursuant to this Code or to rules issued in 
pursuance thereof shall pay contributions to the insurance as 
specified in tables approved by the Government or the authority 
appointed by the Government. The contributions shall be paid for 
one calendar year in advance. 
The Government may issue rules concerning exemptions from 
the provisions of the first paragraph. 
 
Section 2  
Compensation 
shall 
be 
paid 
out 
of 
the 
environmental damage insurance in accordance with the relevant 
terms and conditions to claimants for bodily injury and material 
damage referred to in chapter 32, where: 
1. the claimant is entitled to compensation pursuant to chapter 
32 but cannot obtain payment or the right to demand 
compensation has lapsed; or 
2. it cannot be established who is liable for the injury or damage. 
 
Section 3  
Compensation 
shall 
be 
paid 
out 
of 
the 
environmental clean-up insurance in accordance with the relevant 
terms and conditions for any costs for clean-up that are incurred in 
consequence of an authority’s request for enforcement pursuant to 
chapter 26, section 17 or a decision ordering correction pursuant to 
chapter 26, section 18, where the person who is liable pursuant to 
this Code is not able to pay. However, such compensation shall 
not be payable for costs incurred in consequence of a rescue 
operation carried out in accordance with the Emergency Services 
Act (1986:1102). 
 


--- PAGE 164 ---

 
Ds 2000:61 
 
 
186 
Section 4  
If 
environmental 
damage 
insurance 
or 
environmental clean-up insurance contributions are not paid within 
thirty days of the date of demand, the insurer shall report the non-
payment to the supervisory authority. 
The supervisory authority may order a person who is liable for 
payment to comply with his obligation subject to a penalty of a 
fine. Such an order shall not be appealable. 
 
 
