

--- PAGE 1 ---

THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 
THEWATERRESOURCESMANAGEMENT 
. ACT,2009 
PRINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTER, DAR ES SALAAM-TANZANIA 


--- PAGE 2 ---

.. 
ISSN 0856-033IX 
THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 
ACT SUPPLEMENT 
No.11 
15th May, 2009 
to the Gazette of the United Republic o/Ta11za11ia No. 20 Vol. 90 dated 15'" May, 2009 
Printed by the Government Printer, Dar es Salaam, by Order of Government 
THE WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT ACT, 2009 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS 
Section 
Title 
I . Short title and commencement. 
2. Application. 
3. Interpretation. 
PART II 
• 
PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES OF WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT 
4. Objective of water resources management. 
5. Principles of sustainable water resources management. 
6. Promotion of National Water Policy. 
7. Duty to protect water resources. 
8. Strategic Environmental Assessment. 
9. Environmental Impact Assessment. 
PART III 
OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF WATER 
l 0. Ownership and management of water resources vested in state. 
11. Right to use of water for domestic purposes. 
12. Right to rainwater harvesting or use ofrecycled water . 
353 


--- PAGE 3 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
PART IV 
MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES 
(a) Minister 
13. Powers of the Minister. 
14. Delegation of the Powers of the Minister. 
(b) The Director of water Resources 
15. Director of Water resources. 
16. Functions of the Director of Water Resources. 
17. Appointment of the Authorized officers. 
18. Powers and duties of the Authorized Officer. 
( c) National Water Board 
19. Restoration of Orders. 
• 
20. Establishment of the National Water Board. 
21. Functions of the National Water Board. 
( d) Basin Water Boards 
22. Establishment of Basin Water Boards. 
23. Powers and functions of the Basin Water Boards. 
24. Staff of Basin Water Boards. 
25. Funds of Basin Water Boards. 
26. Annual and supplementary budget. 
27. Accounts and audit. 
28. Annual report. 
( e) Catchment and Sub-catchment Water Committees 
2009 
29. Establishment of Catchment and Sub-catchment Water Comwittees. 
30. Appointment of a Catchment Water Officer. 
PART V 
WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PLANS 
31. Preparation of a Water Resources Management Plan. 
354 
I· 


--- PAGE 4 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
PART VI 
PROTECTION OF WATER RESOURCES 
(a) Water Resources Classification and Reserve 
32. Classification of water resources and resource quality objectives. 
33. Determination of reserve. 
34. Prohibition of human activities near water source. 
(b) 
Restrictions during Drought and natural disaster 
35. Position when volum~ is inadequate to satisfy all rights granted in 
respect thereof. 
36. Suspension or variation of water use permits on account of drought 
and natural disaster. 
( c) Protected Zones 
37. Establishment of protected zones. 
(d) Groundwater Controlled Areas 
38. Declaration of groundwater controlled areas . 
• 
(e) Prevention of Pollution 
39. Prevention of pollution. 
40. Basin Water Board may take measures to remedy effects of pollution. 
41. Control of emergency pollution incidents. 
42. Duty and emergency powers of Basin Water Boards. 
PART VII 
WATER ABSTRACTION AND USE 
(a) Water Use;Permits 
43. Uses that are subject to water use permit. 
~ 
44. Offence for use of water in excess of a water use permit. 
45. Grant of water use permits. 
46. Issuance of water use permits not to imply guaranteed quality and 
quantity. 
47. Permit may be made appurtenant to land. 
48. Conditions implied in all water use permits. 
355 
2009 
• 


--- PAGE 5 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
49. Position when volume inadequate to satisfy all permits granted in 
respect thereof. 
50. Situations where quantity or duration is unspecified. 
(b) Recording of Unregistered Rights 
51. Recording ofunregistered rights. 
52. Incidents of customary water rights. 
53. Application for water use permits by customary water users. 
( c) Groundwater Permit 
• 
54. Duty to apply for a groundwater permit to construct or enlarge wells. 
55. Offence in respect of failure to obtain a groundwater permit. 
56. Distance limits for sinking of wells or boreholes. 
5 7. Submission of data to the Basin Water Board. 
58. Groundwater encountered in mining operations. 
59. Obligation to seal a well no longer in use. 
60. Waste of groundwater. 
61. Powers of Basin Water Board in relation to aquifers. 
62. Power to regulate the profession of groundwater drilling. 
( d) Discharge Permits 
63. Discharge permit. 
64. Offences in respect of water pollution. 
65. Water quality and effluent standards. 
66. Conditions to be attached tq a discharge permit. 
67. Provisional discharge permit. 
68. Prohibition on discharge to groundwater. 
(e) General Provisions Relating to Water Use, Groundwater and 
Discharge Permits 
69. Entitlement to an existing right or permit. 
70. Duration of a water use permit or a discharge permit. 
71. Variation of a permit with consent. 
72. Declaration for public purpose. 
73. Transfer of permits. 
74. Conditions to be attached on water use and discharge permits. 
75. Application procedure. 
76. Determination for breach of conditions of a permit. 
77. Notice to show cause for misuse of a permit. 
356 


--- PAGE 6 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management • 
(f) Water Register 
78. Keeping of a Water Register by Basin Water Boards. 
79. Keeping of a National Water Register. 
PART VIII 
WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS 
80. Establishment and purposes of a water users association. 
81. Approval and registration of water users associations. 
82. Registration of water users associations. 
83. Powers of Basin Water Board to give directions. 
PART IX 
PROVISIONS RELATED TO WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT WORKS 
84. Powers of basin water boards to undertake works. 
85. Powers of basin water boards in respect of permits conditional on 
construction of works. 
PARTX 
DAM SAFETY AND FLOOD MANAGEMENT 
86. Interpretation. 
87. Blockage of watercourses. 
88. Control measures for dams with safety risk. 
89. Responsibilities of approved professional persons. 
90. Registration of dams with safety risk. 
91 Factors to be considered in declaring dams with safety risk. 
92. Exemptions. 
93. Review of Dam facilities. 
94. Regulations regarding dam safety and prevention of flood risk. 
95. Measures for flood mitigation and control. 
PART XI 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
96. Water abstraction charges. 
97. Use of water charges. 
PART XII 
TRANS-BOUNDARY WATER . 
98. Policies, strategies and legislation in respect to trans-boundary. 
waters. 
357 
2009 


--- PAGE 7 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
99. Minister and management oftrarisboundary waters. 
l 00. Collection of data and information on trans-boundary waters. 
PART XIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS 
l O 1. Offence to assault, threaten, resist, hinder or delay an 
authorised person. 
102. Miscellaneous offences and penalties. 
103. Water pollution. 
104. Compounding of offences. 
105. Compensation for harm, loss or damage suffered. 
106. 
Appeals regulations. 
f 
PART XIV 
APPEALS 
PART XV 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
107. Compensation. 
108. Service of Notices. 
109. Civil liability not affected. 
110. Indemnity and liability. 
111. Power to make regulations. 
PART XVI 
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
112. Repeal and Savings Provisions. 
113. Transfer ofresponsibilities to boards and committees. 
114. Transitional provisions. 
· 
SCHEDULES 
358 
2009 


--- PAGE 8 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 
No. 11 oF 2009 
!ASSENT, 
JAKAYA MRISHO KIKWETE, 
President 
12111 May, 2009 
An Act to provide for institutional and legal framework for 
sustainable management and development of water 
resources; to outline principles for water resources 
management; to provide for the prevention and control of 
water pollution; to provide for participation of stakeholders 
and the general public in implementation of the National 
Water Policy, repeal of the Water Utilization (Control and 
Regulation) Act and to provide for related matters. 
ENACTED by Parliament of the United Republic of Tanzania. 
359 


--- PAGE 9 ---

No. 11 
Short 
title and 
com-
mence-
ment 
Applica-
tion 
Interpre-
tation 
f 
Water Resources Management 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS 
.2009 
1. This Act may be cited as the Water Resources Management Act, 
2009 and shall come into operation on such date as the Minister may, by 
notice published in the Gazette, appoint. 
2. This Act shall apply to Mainland Tanzania. 
3. In this Act, unless the context requires otherwise-
"appellate authority" means the authority pursuant to section 107 of this 
Act; 
"aquatic ecosystem" means those physical and biological features, including 
land, water, the atmosphere, flora and fauna, which are within, under, 
over, in contact with, or sustained by the water in water bodies; 
"authorised officer" means a person authorised as such in accordance 
with section 17; 
"Basin Water Board" means a Basin Water Board established under 
section22; 
"beneficial use of water" means the use of water for social, economic 
and environmental purposes including but not limited to domestic water 
supply, irrigation, generation of electric power, livestock watering 
and dipping, industrial production, fishing, and the maintenance of the 
aquatic ecosystem; 
"catchment" means the surface area and underground stratum of land 
that collects water to supply a source of water; 
"Catchment Water Committee" means a Committee established under 
section 29 for purposes of managing a catchment; 
"customary water rights" mean the rights and practices m relation to 
water resources that have been practised by communities or mdiv1duals 
since time immemorial in the belief that they create binding rights 
and obligations; 
"Director" means the Director responsible for water resources as provided 
for under section 15 ; 
"discharge permit" means a pem1it to discharge effluents from any source 
registered irt the Water Register under the provisions of this Act; 
"domestic purposes" includes the use of water solely for the purpose of 
360 


--- PAGE 10 ---

No. 11 
vVuter Resources Management 
meeting household and domestic needs and excludes any commercial 
activities; 
"easement" means a right to enter on the land of another for the purpose 
of constructing or maintaining works thereon or storing water thereon 
or carrying water under, through or over such land or for all or any of 
such purposes; 
"effluent" includes any flowing-out or fluid material discharged from 
domestic or industrial wastes systems which, by reason of its quality, 
quantity or characteristics, is likely to impair the beneficial use of 
receiving water by adversely affecting its natural state; 
"effluent standards" means the standard for treatment and discharge of 
effluent promulgated under the Environmental Management Act; 
"effluent treatment plant" means any device or structure designed for the 
treatment of effluent removing matters in suspension, detoxicating 
or stabilizing biodegradable organic impurities so as to prevent the 
occurrence of secondary decomposition upon the effluent mingling 
with water; 
"groundwater" means water naturally stored or flowing below the surface 
of the ground and not apparent on the surface of the ground; 
"Groundwater Permit" means any permit to construct, sink, enlarge, or 
deepen a well or borehole, registered in the Water Register under 
the provisions of this Act; 
"Groundv,rater Controlled Area" means an area declared to be a 
Groundwater Controlled Arca under section 38; 
"irrigation" means the use of water for the purpose of improving 
productivity of agricultural crops per unit of land and per unit of 
water and thereby contributing to increased food security; 
"land drainage" for purposes of this Act means providing for disposal of 
excess water on land and protection of water against flooding by 
structural or non-structural means in a manner required by a water 
resources management plan or directions by the Basin Water Board; 
"Minister" means the Minister responsible for water resources; 
"Ministry" means a Ministry responsible for water; 
"National Water Board" means the National Water Board established by 
section20; 
"pollution" in relation to water resources, means any direct or indirect 
alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological properties 
of the water resource so as to make it-
(a) less fit for any beneficial purpose for which it is or may 
reasonably be expected to be used; or 
361 
2009 


--- PAGE 11 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(b) hannfu 1 or potentially harmful to-
(i) the welfare, health or safety of human beings; 
(ii)any aquatic or non-aquatic life or property; or the 
environment; 
"protected area" means an area such as nature reserve, game protected 
area or reserve, forest reserve, marine park, national park, watershed, 
or any such areas so Gazetted pursuant to any Act; 
"protected Zone" means a Protected Zone established under section 37; 
"rainwater harvesting" means a technology used for collecting and storing 
rainwater from land surfaces, rock catchments or roof tops using 
simple techniques such as jars and pots as well as more complex 
techniques such as charcos dams; 
"recycling" means the re-use of water, with or without treatment, before 
the water is discharged to surface waters or groundwaters; 
"reserve" means the quantity and quality of water required for-
(a) satisfying basic human needs by securing a basic water 
supply for people who are now or who shall in the reasonably 
for near future, be-
(i) relying upon 
(ii) taking water from; or 
(iii) being supplied from the relevant water resources ; and 
(b) protecting to protect aquatic ecosystem in order to secure 
ecologically sustainable development and use of the relevant 
water resources. 
"stream" means the water contained in a watercourse and includes a 
river; 
"Sub-catchment Water Committee" means a Committee established under 
section 29 for purposes of managing a sub-catchment; 
"surface water" means all water flowing over the surface of the ground, 
or contained in a spring or natural lake or reservoir or swamp and all 
water contained directly underneath a river bed; 
"sustainable management" means managing the use, development and 
protection of waterresources in a manner, or at a rate, which provides 
for the social, economic, sanitation and cultural well-being of the 
people, while safeguarding the life-supporting capacity of water for 
the ecosystem both in the present and the future; 
"trans-boundary waters" means the water resources contained within 
362 
.. 


--- PAGE 12 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Afanagcmcnt 
drainage or river basins \vhich cross the geographical boundaries of 
and are shared with more than one sovereign country; 
"underground strata" means any strata at whatever level or distance below 
the surface; 
'water" means all water flowing over the surface of the ground, or 
contained in or flowing in or from, a spring or stream or natural lake 
or reservoir or swamp, or beneath a watercourse and all water from 
underground strata; 
"water authority" means the water supply and sanitation authority 
established under the Water Supply and Sanitation Act, 2009; 
"water basin" means an area of land in relation to any river or other 
water source as described under this Act 
"water management institution" means the National Water Board, a Basin 
"Water Board or a Catchment or Sub-catchment Water Committee, 
as the case may be; 
"Water Register" means the register established and maintained pursuant 
to section 82; 
"water resources" means a \Yater course, surface water, ground water 
and estuary water; 
"water resources management plan" means a plan prepared pursuant to 
Part V of this Act; 
"water source" means-
(a) a river, tributary, estuary, lake, swamp, marsh or other wetland; 
(b) an aquifer or a spring; 
( c) sea waters and interface between sea water and fresh water 
( d) a dam, pond or reservoir; 
"water use permits" means any permit to use or divert, dam, store, abstract 
or use water from surface or underground water source registered 
in the Water Register under the provisions of this Act, and may also 
mean a water right issued under the Water Utilization (Control and 
Regulation) Act. 
2009 
"Water Users Association" means an entity established by the users of 
Cap. 331 
water resources within a specified area pursuant to Part VIII of this 
Act; 
"works" include canals, channels, reservoirs, embankments, weirs, dams, 
wells, boreholes and other works constructed for or in connection 
with the diversion, damming, storage or abstraction of water, or for 
the protection of rivers, lakes, or any other water sources, or for the 
conservation of water, or for drainage or for the use of water for any 
purposes or for the conservation of rainfall. 
363 


--- PAGE 13 ---

No. 11 
Objective 
of water 
resources 
manage-
ment 
Principlt:!s 
of 
sustainable 
water 
·resources 
manage-
ment 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
PART II 
OBJECTIVES AND PRINCIPLES 
OF WATER RESOURCES MAN_AGEMENT 
4.-( 1) The objective of this Act is to ensure that the nation's water 
resources are protected, used, developed, conserved, managed and 
controlled in ways which take into account the following fundamental 
principles, including-
( a) meeting the basic human needs of present and future 
generations; 
(b) promoting equitable access to water and the principle that 
water is essential for life and that safe drinking water is a 
basic human right; 
(c) promoting the efficient, sustainable and beneficial use 
of water in the public interest; 
( d) facilitating social economic development; 
(e) promoting stakeholders' involvement in water resources 
management at all levels especially by ensuring 
decentralisation to the lowest possible level of government, 
consistent with available capacity at such level; 
(t) protecting biological diversity especially the aquatic 
ecosystems; 
(g) providing for systems for managing the growing demand for 
water use through integrated planning and management of 
surface and groundwater resources, in ways which 
incorporate economic, environmental and social dimensions 
in the planning process; 
(h) preventing and controlling pollution and degradation of water 
resources; 
(i) - providing implementation of international obligations stipulated 
under international legal instruments to which the United 
Republic is a party; and 
U) promoting dam safety security and the management of 
water related disasters. 
(2) For achieving the objective set under subsection ( 1) of this section, 
suitable institutions with appropriate stakeholders and gender 
representation shall be established. 
5. Any personexercisingjurisdiction under this Act shall, in relation 
to any decision, order, exercise of any power or performance of any 
function, be guided by the following principles of sustainable integrated 
water resources management and sustainable development-
(a) the precautionary principle; 
(b) polluter pay~ principle; 
364 
.. 


--- PAGE 14 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
( c) the principle of eco-system integrity; 
( d) the principle of public participation in the development policies, 
plans and processes for the management of the water 
resources; 
( e) the principle of international co-operation in management of 
environmental resources shared by two or more states; and 
(t) the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities. 
6.-{l) Any person exercising powers under this Act or under any 
other written law having a bearing on the provision of water resources 
management shall strive to promote and have regard to the National 
Water Policy, in respect of water resources management. 
(2) Subject to subsection ( 1 ),the preference for water allocation shall 
be for-
(a) domestic purposes; 
(b) environmental reserve; and 
{c) socio economic activities depending on the availability of water 
resources. 
7. Every person residing in Mainland Tanzania shall have a stake 
and a duty to safeguard and protect water resources and to inform the 
relevant authority of any activity and phenomenon that may affect the 
quantity and quality of the water resources significantly. 
8. Where a major water project is planned, the Director of Water 
Resources shall carry out a Strategic Environmental Assessment in 
accordance with the procedure and Regulations made under the 
Environmental Management Act;. 
9. Any proposed development in a water resource area or watershed 
to which this Act applies, whether that development is proposed by or is 
to be implemented by a person or organisation in the public or private 
sector shall carry out an Environmental Impact Assessment in accordance 
with the provisions of the Environmental Management Act. 
365 
2009 
Promotion 
of 
National 
Water 
Policy, 
2002 
Duty to 
protect 
water 
resources 
Strategic 
environ-
mental 
assess-
ment 
Cap. 191 
Environ-
mental 
Impact 
Ass.ess-
ment 
Cap. 191 


--- PAGE 15 ---

No. 11 
Owner-
ship and 
mar.age-
ment of 
water 
resources 
vested in 
state 
Right to 
use of 
water for 
domestic 
purposes 
Right to 
rainwater 
harvesting 
or use of 
recycled 
water 
Powers 
of the 
Minister 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
PART III 
OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF WATER 
10.-{l) All water r~ources in Mainland Tanzania shall continue to 
be public water and vested in the President as the trustee for and on 
behalf of citizens. 
(2) Without prejudice to subsection ( 1) the President shall, through 
various designated institutions, manage the water resources for the benefit 
of the people of.Mainland Tanzania .. 
11.-(1) The powers to confer a right to the use of water from any 
water resource is hereby vested in the Minister save to the extent that 
it is alienated by any other written or customary law. 
(2) Notwithstanding the provision of subsection ( 1 ), any person having 
lawful access to any watercourse may abstract and use the same for 
domestic purposes without a Water Use Permit issued under this Act: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing 
the construction of any works by any person. 
(3) Notwithstanding the provision of subsection ( 1 ), any person being 
the legal owner or occupier of any land may construct a shallow hand-
dug well and use the water for domestic purposes without a Groundwater 
Permit issued under this Act subject to any limitation on the depth of such 
wells in any area as may be prescribed in Regulations by the Minister. 
12.-{ 1) The owner or occupier of any land may construct any works 
for rainwater harvesting or for recycling of used water other than in a 
river or stream and abstract and use the water so conserved or recycled 
for domestic purposes without a Water Use Permit issued under this 
Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding the generality of subsection (1 ), no works for 
the purpose ofrainwater harvesting shall have the capacity greater than 
the capacity prescribed in regulations by the Minister. 
PART IV 
MANAGEMENT OF WATFR RFSOlJRC'ES 
(a) Afinister 
13.-( 1) The Minister shall be responsible for national policy and 
strategy formulation and for ensuring the execution by authorities or 
persons under the control of the Minister of their functions connected 
with the implementation of the Act. 
366 


--- PAGE 16 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(2) Without prejudice to subsection (1 ), the Minister shall-
(a) oversee policy and legislative aspects of integrated water 
resources management; 
(b) appoint members of the National Water Board; 
( c) establish basin water boards; 
(d) provide for supervision and coordination of basin water 
boards; 
( e) facilitate sectoral coordination and coordinated planning on 
aspects that may impact on water resources; 
(f) ensure and safeguard national interest on trans-boundary 
water resources; 
(g) formulate regulations, technical standards and guidelines for 
purposes of implementing the provisions of this Act; 
(h) ensure sustainable development of water resources of 
national interest; and 
( i) provide for the safe construction of and management of dams. 
(3) The Minister shall be assisted in the discharge of his duties 
under this Act by the Director of Water Resources. 
14. The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette and subject 
to such conditions as may be imposed, delegate the performance of any 
function stipulated under the Act to-
(a) the Director or any official of the Ministry; 
(b) any other Ministry or department of the Government; 
(c) a local government authority; 
(d) an Agency established pursuant to the Executive Agencies 
Act or any other written law; or 
( e) any institution established under this Act. 
(b) The Director of Water Resources 
15.-(1) There shall be appointed by the Minister the Director of 
Water Resources from among public servants. 
(2) The Director shall be the advisor to the Government on all matters 
pertaining to water resources. 
(3) Where thf Director is required or empowered by this Act to 
make a determination affecting or likely to affect the rights of any person · 
or the opportunity for any person to undertake any activity shall give that 
person reasons for such decision. 
367 
2009 
Delegation 
of powers 
ofthe 
Minister 
Cap 245 
Director of 
Water 
Resources 
l 


--- PAGE 17 ---

Ne.11 
Functions 
of the 
Director 
of Water 
Resources 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
( 4) There shall be appointed such officers who shall have the duty to 
ensure the efficient, effective and sustainable economical management 
and supervision of water resources in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act. 
(5) Officers appointed under subsection (4) shall be allocated or 
delegated such functions and shall be located in such offices or institutions 
as the Director shall consider that the Officers contribute to the proper 
management of water resources. 
16. On matters pertaining to the sustainable management of water 
resources, the Director shall-
( a) co-ordinate activities of Basin Water Boards; 
(b) conduct national water resources management planning and 
an implementation strategy; 
( c) oversee water basin planning and management; 
(d) integrate inter-sectoral coordination and planning on aspects 
that may have impact on water resources; 
(e) evaluate existing and proposed policies and activities of the 
Government ministries and agencies relating to the allocation, 
management and protection of water resources and, on the 
basis of that, formulate policies and programmes aiming at 
management and development of water resources and control 
of water pollution; 
(f) ensure that water resource management operates according 
to the principles of environment?! sustainability; 
(g) supervise and co-ordinate the activities of Basin Water Boards 
and serve as a link channel of communication between these 
bodies and the Government; 
(h) resolve inter-sectoral and mter-basin conflicts; 
(i) supervise and coordinate data collection and national water 
resources assessments; 
G) maintain a National Water Register in accordance with Section 
79; 
(k) determine national investment priorities and financing patterns 
on water resources; 
(l) co-ordinate and harmonise externally funded projects and 
programmes affecting water resources; 
(m) facilitate the conduct of water audits and provide t~chnical 
support in terms of information tools, basin models and 
decision support systems; 
368 


--- PAGE 18 ---

' 
No. 11 
T¥ater Resources Management 
(n) recommend to the Minister legislative measures for the 
management of water resources and the effective control 
of water pollution; 
(o) prepare annual reports on the state of water resources in 
the country; and 
(p) ensure protection of water sources of national interest. 
17. The Basin Water Board may, in writing, appoint any suitable 
person as an authorised officer to perform the functions contemplated in 
Section 18. 
18.-(1) An authorised officer may, at any reasonable time and without 
prior notice, enter or cross property with the necessary persons, vehicles, 
equipment and materials in order to carry out routine inspections of the 
use of water or discharge of effluents under any authorisation. 
(2) An authorised officer may enter a property with the necessary 
persons, veh~cles, equipment and materials after-
(a) giving reasonable notice to the owner or occupier of the 
property, which notice shall state the purpose of the proposed 
entry; and 
(b) obtaining the consent of the owner or occupier of the property, 
in order to-
(i) clean, repair, maintain remove or demolisp works operated 
by a water resources management institution; 
(ii) undertake any works necessary for cleaning, clearing, 
stabilising and repairing the water source and protecting 
the resource quality; 
· 
(iii) establish the suitability of any water source or site for 
constructing a water works; 
(iv) undertake any work necessary to comply with an obligation 
imposed on any person under this Act, where tha tperson 
has failed to fulfil that obligation; and 
(v) erect any structure and install and operate any equipment 
on a temporary or permanent bas1s fci- monitoring and 
gathering information on water resources. 
(3) An authorised officer may, at any reasonable time and without 
prior notice, on the authority of a warrant, enter a property with the 
necessary persons, vehicles, equipment and materials and perform any 
369 
2009 
Appoint-
ment of 
authori-
sed 
officer 
Powers 
and 
duties 
of 
authori-
sed 
officer 


--- PAGE 19 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
--------------
Restora-
tion of 
orders 
Cap. 191 
Establish-
ment of 
the 
National 
Water 
Boa:d 
action necessary to-
(a) investigate whether any conc':tion attached to any permit issued 
in accordance with this A...:t, or any notice or directive is 
being contravened; 
(b) investigate whether any information supplied in connection 
with water use or effluent discharge is accurate; or 
(c) carry out any of the activities referred to in sub&ection (2) 
where the consent of the owner or occupier has been 
withheld. 
(4) A warrant referred to in subsection (3) may be issued by a judge 
or magistrate who has jurisdiction in the area where the property in 
question is situated. 
(5) Where a warrant is likely to be issued and if applied fo, but the 
delay involved in obtaining a warrant is likely to defeat the object of an 
inspection in terms of subsection (3), an authorised officer may enter a 
property without a warrant. 
(6) An authorised officer entering a property in terms of this section 
shall, at the request of any person on th:,t property, identify himself and 
present a letter of authorization issued under section 17. 
(7) Notwithstanding any provision of this section, an authorised officer 
may not, under any circumstances, enter a dwelling without the consent 
of the occupier or without a warrant authorising entry. 
19. For the purpose of environmental management in relation to water 
resources where need arise for imposition of a restoration order, the 
Director or the Basin Water officer may request the National Environment 
Management Council to issue an environmental restoration order in 
accordance with the Environmental Management Act. 
(c) National Water Board 
20.-( 1) There is established the National Water Board. 
(2) The National Water Board shall be an advisory board to the 
Minister on matters related tc multi-sectoral coordination in integrated 
water resources planning and management as well as resolution ofnational 
and international water conflicts. 
370 
..___ -------------


--- PAGE 20 ---

.. 
No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(3) The National Water Board shall consist of members specified in 
the First Schedule. 
(4) The Minister shall have powers to dissolve the Board. 
21. The National Water Board shall have the following powers and 
functions to-
( a) examine any matter which may be referred to it by the 
Minister or any sector Ministry relating to sustainable 
management of water resources and shall recommend to 
the Minister or the sector Ministry, as the case may be, 
such action as is necessary for achieving the objectives of 
this Act; 
(b) advise on investment priorities and financing patterns and 
co-ordinate and harmonise externally funded projects and 
programmes affecting water resources; 
( c). advise on integration of inter - sectoral water resources 
assessment and planning; 
• 
(d) advise on co-ordination of basin planning and management; 
(e) advise on inter-sectoral or inter-basin conflicts; 
(f) advise on investment priorities and financing patterns; 
(g) advise on inter-basin water transfer; 
(h) advise on trans-boundary water resources management; 
(i) recommend to the Minister legislative measures for the 
management qf water resources and the effective control 
of water pollution; 
U) liase with the Director on technical matters; 
(k) prepare the bi- annual report on the state of the wa,:er 
resources; and 
(]) perform such other water resources advisory functions as 
the Minister may deem necessary. 
(d) Basin Water Boards 
22.-(1) The Minister shall, by order published in the Gazette, establish 
a Basin Water Board in respect of each water basin. 
(2) A Basin Water Board established under subsection (l) of this 
section shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common 
seal and shall have power in its corporate name to sue and be sued and, 
in the exercise of its powers and functions, to do and permit all such 
371 
2009 
Functions 
ofthe 
National 
Water 
Board 
Establish-
,ment of 
the Basin 
Water 
Board 


--- PAGE 21 ---

No. 11 
Powers 
and 
functions 
of the 
Basin 
Water 
Board 
Staff of 
Basin 
Water 
Boards 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
things as may lawfully be done or permitted by a body corporate in 
furtherance of its objects. 
(3) The powers and functions of the Basin Water Board shall be 
exercised and performed under the direction of the Board. 
( 4) The Second Schedule shall have effect in respect to the 
membership and procedure of the Basin Water Board.• 
23. The Basin Water Boards shall have the following powers and 
functions to-
( a) prepare basin water resources management plans, projects 
budgets and an implementation strategy; 
(b) integrate district plans into basin water resources management 
plans; 
(c) provide guidelines and standards for construction and 
maintenance of water source structures; 
( d) monitor, evaluate and approve construction and maintenance 
of water source structures; 
( e) collect, process and analyse data for water resources 
management; 
{f) maintain and update assessments of the availability and 
potential demand for water resources; 
(g) approve, issue and revoke water use and discharge permits; 
(h) maintain a Water Register in accordance with Section 78; 
(i) monitor and enforce water use and discharge permits and 
pollution prevention measures; 
U) resolve intra-basin conflicts; 
(k) implement water resources management projects and 
programmes; 
(I) co-ordinate the inter-sectoral water resources management 
at the basin level and serve as a channel of communication 
between these sectors and water users in general; 
(m) advise the Director on technical aspects of trans-boundary 
water issues in the basin; 
(n) appointment of Chairman and members of the Catchment 
and Sub-catchment Committees; 
(o) prepare reports on the state of water resources in a basin. 
24.-(1) There shall be a Basin Water Officer of the Basin Water 
Board who shall be appointed by the Minister in consultation with Basin 
372 


--- PAGE 22 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
Water Board on such tenns and conditions of service as the Board 
may det determine. 
(2) The Basin Water Officer shall be the principal officer of the 
Board and, subject to the directions of the Basin Water Board, shall be 
responsible for the management of the affairs of the Basin Water Board. 
(3) The Basin Water Board may appoint such officers and other 
staff as may be necessary for the exercise and performance of its powers 
and functions upon such terms and conditions as it may determine. 
25.-{l) The funds and resources of the Basin Water Board shall be-
(a) fees and charges as may be collected from the issuance and 
operation of permits under this Act; 
(b) any other payment due to the Basin Water Board in respect 
of any other matter incidental to its functions; 
(c) such sums as may be approved for the Basin Water Board 
by the Parliament; and 
( d) such donations, grants, bequests and loans as the Basin Water 
Board may, from time to time receive from any person or 
organisation. 
(2) The funds and resources of the Basin Water Board shall be 
applied in the exercise of the duties and powers of the Basin Water 
Board. 
26.-(1) Not less than two months before the beginning of.every 
financial year, the Basin Water Board shall, at a meeting pass a detailed 
annual budget of the -
(a) rates of fees and charges to be levied by the B~sin Water 
Board and Catchments and Sub-catchments Water 
Committees for the issuance and operation of permits under 
this Act; 
(b) revenues expected to be received; and 
( c) Annual and supplementary budget 
( d) the Basin Water Board during the forthcoming financial year 
and, whenever circumstances so require, the Basin Water 
Board may pass a supplementary budget in any financial 
year. 
(2) The Annual Budget shall be endorsed by the Basin Water Board. 
373 
2009 
Funds of 
the Basin 
Water 
Board 
Annual 
and 
supple-
mentary 


--- PAGE 23 ---

No. 11 
Accounts 
and audit 
f 
Annual 
report 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(3) Where in any financial year the Basin Water Board requires to 
make any disbursement not provided for, or ofan amount in excess of 
the amount provided for in the annual budget for any year, the Board 
shall, at a meeting, pass a supplementary budget detailing such 
disbursement. 
27.-(1) The Basin Water Board shall cause to be provided and kept 
in accordance with International Accounting Standards and on an accruals 
basis, proper books of accounts and records with respect to-
( a) the receipt and expenditure of moneys by, and other financial 
transactions of the Basin Water Board; and 
(b) the assets and liabilities of the Basin Water Board, 
and shall cause to be made out for every financial year a balance sheet 
showing the details of the income and expenditure of the Basin Water 
Board and its assets and liabilities. 
(2) Within six months of the close of every financial year the accounts 
including the balance sheet of the Basin Water Board shall be audited by 
the Controller and Auditor General in accordance with the provisions of 
the Public Audit Act. 
(3) Every audited balance sheet shall be placed before a meeting of 
the Basin Water Board and, if adopted by the Basin Water Board, be 
endorsed with a certificate that it has been so adopted. 
(4) As soon as the accounts of the Basin Water Board have been 
audited, and in any case not later than six months after the closure of the 
financial year, the Board shall submit to the Minister a copy ·of the audited 
statement of accounts. 
28.-( 1) The Basin Water Board shall cause to be prepared within 
six months after the close of each financial year an annual report detailing 
generally activities and operations of the Basin Water Board during that 
year. 
(2) The. report shall be accompanied by-
( a) a copy of the audited accounts of the Basin Water Board 
together with the auditor's report on the accounts; and 
(b) a copy of the annual reports of the Basin Water Boards . 
. 374 


--- PAGE 24 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(3) The Basin Water Board shall cause copies of the annual report, 
the audited accounts and the auditors' report to be placed on each Water 
Registet provided for under Section 78. 
( 4) The Minister shall, as mon as practicable after receiving the 
report from the Basin Water B Jard, lay before the National Assembly 
the audited accounts of the Basin Water Boards together with the auditor's 
report, and the annual report. 
(e) Catchment and Sub-catchment Water Committees 
29.-( I) Minister may, by Order in the Gazette and upon consultation 
with Basin Water Board designate and declare such areas as Catchment 
or Sub-catchments. 
(2) The general functions of the Catchments or Sub-catchments water 
committee shall be-
( a) to coordinate and harmonize catchment or sub-catchment 
integrated water resources management plan; 
(b) to resolve water resources conflicts in th:.. catchment or sub 
catchment; and 
(c) to perform other delegated functions by the Basin Water 
Board. 
(3) The Third Schedule shall have effect to the appointment of 
members and other matters relating to the cathchment and Sub-catchment 
Water Committee. 
30. There shall be a Catchment Water Officer of the Catchment or 
suh-catchment Water Committee who shall he appointed hy the Basin 
Water Board. 
PARTY 
lNlElikATED WA!l::ok RESOUkC'E MJ\\IA(jl:-:'vlENl PLANS 
31.-(1) The Minister shall cause a National Integrated Water 
Re~ >urces Management Plan to be prepared based on integrated water 
res( urccs management plans prepared by the Basin Water Boards and 
Cat,:hment Water Committees. 
(2) The Plan shall include, inter a!ia, the following-
(a) a water balance for each basin of Mainland Tanzania that 
compares expected water demand with data and information 
regarding \\ater availability; and 
375 
2009 
Establish-
ment of 
Catchment 
and Sub-
catchment 
Water 
Commi-
ttees 
Appoint-· 
ment ofa 
Catch-
ment 
Water 
Officer 
Prepara-
tion 
of a Water 
Resources 
Manage-
ment Plan 


--- PAGE 25 ---

No. 11 
Classifica-
tion of 
water 
. resources 
and 
resource 
.quality 
objectives 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(b) proposed options for meeting forecasted demand for each 
basin in which forecasted water demand exceeds available 
supply, which options may include, without limitation-
( i) water demand management programmes; 
(ii) necessary infrastructure construction; 
(iii) desirable institutional initiatives; 
(iv) inter-basin transfers of water; 
( c) classifying water resources in accordance with section 32; 
(d) requirements of the reserve for each water resource in 
accordance with section 33; 
· ( e) identifying areas which, in accordance with this Act, shall be 
designated Protected Zones and Groundwater ControlledAreas; 
,f) any other measure, including appropriate legal reforms, which 
is deemed necessary to achieve the objectives of the Plan; 
and 
· 
(g) measures for implementation of the Plan._ 
(3) The Plan shall be prepared by the Basin Water Boards, Catchment 
and Sub-catchments Water Committees, in such manner as the Minister 
shall determine in Regulations adopted under this Act, and shall be subject 
to consultation with all stakeholders before approval is made. 
(4) At least once in each successive five year period following 
approval of the Water Resources Management Plan, the.Minister shall 
cause it to be reviewed and amended as appropriate, but not earlier than 
· three years after the approval of the phm. 
PART VI 
PROTECTION OF WATER ~ESOURCES 
(a) Water Resources Classification and Reserve 
32.-( 1) The Minister may, by regulations, prescribe , a system for 
classifying water resources for the purposes of determining water quality 
objectives for each class of water resources . 
(2) Under the prescribed classification system, water resources may 
be classified according to type, location, geographical area, use and other 
factors a:nd the system may-
( a) establish guidelines and procedures for determining different 
classes of water resources; 
(b) in respect of each class of water resource-
• 
376 


--- PAGE 26 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(i) establish procedures for determining the reserve; 
(ii) establish procedures which are designed to satisfy the 
quality requirements of water users as far as is reasonably 
possible, without significantly altering the natural water 
quality characteristics of the water resource; 
(iii) establish procedures which are designed to take into 
account seasonal variations of flow and the potential 
impact of flow variations on water use _permits and 
discharge permits to be issued 1n accordance with sections 
48 and66; 
(iv) set out water uses for in-stream or land based activities 
which shall be regulated or prohibited in order to protect 
the water resource; and 
(v) provide for such other matters relating to the protection,. 
use, development, conservation, management and control 
of water resources as the Minister, in consultation with 
the National Water Board, may consider necessary. 
(3) The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette-
(a) classify each water resource in accordance with the 
prescribed classification system;· 
(b) specify the resource quality objectives for a water resource . 
of the class to which it belongs; and 
( c) specify the requirements for achieving the objectives and the 
dates from which the objectives shall apply. 
· 
33.-{ 1) The Minister shall, by notice in the Gazette, determine the 
reserve for the whole or part of each water resource which has been 
classified under this part. 
(2) A determination of the reserve shall ensure that adequate 
allowance is made for each aspect of the reserve. 
(3) The Minister, Basin Water Boards and all public bodies shall, 
when exercising any statutory power or performing any statutory duty, 
take into account and give effect to the requirements of the reserve. 
34. Without prejudice to section 57 of the Environmental Management 
Act, the Minister may, by an order published in the Gazette, prohibit 
human activities to be conducted beyond sixty metres from a water darn 
or reservoir or a water source. 
377 
2009 
Deter-
mination 
of reserve 
Prohibi-
tion 
ofhuman 
activities 
near 
water 
source 
Cap. 191 


--- PAGE 27 ---

No. 11 
Position 
when 
volume is 
inadequate 
to satisfy 
all permits 
granted in 
respect 
thereof 
Suspension 
or variation 
of water 
use permits 
on account 
of drought 
and natural 
disasters 
Establish-
ment of 
Protected 
Zone 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(b) Restrictions During Drought and Natural Disasters 
35.-(1) Where, at any time, in any specified area, the volume of 
water to which permits of use exist is in,:ufficient to satisfy all such 
permits, the Minister may direct the appn i:riate Basin Water Board to 
review the abstraction, use, diversion, control and appropriation of water 
in that area and in so doing the Basin Water Board may revise the quantity 
allowed by any permit and the terms and conditions of any permit to the 
use of water in that area. 
(2) The Basin Water Board shall have regard to the principle that 
where beneficial use of the whole right has been maintained, no permit 
shall be cancelled or reduced except in propoprtion with all other permits 
in the same area. 
36. Where, in the opinion of the Basin Water Board, account being 
had of drought and natural disasters the supply of water from arv source 
is insufficient or likely to become insufficient for the needs oftl persons 
using it, the Basin Water Board may at any time suspend or vary all or 
any water use permits from that source issued in accordance with this 
Act, for such period as may be deemed necessary, and thereupon such 
water use permits shall cease to have effect for th~ period of the 
suspension or shall be exercisable only as varied, as the case may be. 
( c) Protected Zones 
37.-(1) The Minister after consultation with other institutions 
responsible for land management, may, by notice published in the Gazette, 
for the protection of water sources from pollution, erosion or any other 
adverse effects establish a Protected Zone on land draining to, or above-
( a) any water, borehole, treatment or other works forming part 
of a water supply or from which water supply is drawn; 
(b) any sewer, sewage works or outfall; or 
( c) any catchment, swamp, reservoir, aquifer, wetland spring, or 
any other source of water. 
(2) The Basin Water Board may construct and maintain such works 
378 


--- PAGE 28 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
and may take any such measures in a protected Zone as are considered 
necessary. 
(3) The notice may-
(a) prohibit or limit any activities within the protected zone as the 
Basin Water Board sees fit; or 
(b) require any occupier of land within the protected zone to 
construct and maintain works, or take any measure 
prescribed by the Basin Water Board in accordance with 
the Notice. 
(4) Compensation shall be payable to the owner or occupier ofland 
in which a Protected Zone has been established. 
(5) Where the protected zone is established for purposes of water 
supply, the Basin Water Board may order the water authority to pay any . 
compensation payable. · 
(6) No compensation shall be payable to owner or occupier who 
was not in ownership or occupation of that land at the time when the 
protected Zone was established. 
( d) Groundwater Controlled Areas 
38.-(1) On the recommendation of the Basin Water Board, the 
Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, declare any area of 
Mainland Tanzania to be a Groundwater ContiolledArea. 
(2) In exercising powers under subsection (1 ), the Minister shall have 
regard to-
(a) the availability of groundwater in the area; 
(b) existing uses of groundwater and foreseeable water demands; 
( c) possible adverse impacts by the exploitation of groundwater 
on the availability of surface water; and 
( d) existing and potential conflicts among water users in the area. 
(3) Upon publication of the Order in the Gazette, no person shall 
construct, sink, enlarge or deepen a well or borehole except in accordance 
with a groundwater permit granted under this Act. 
(4) Compensation shall be payable to the owner or occupier ofland 
in which a Groundwater Controlled Area has been established. 
3 79 
2009 
Declaration 
of 
ground-
water 
controlled 
areas 


--- PAGE 29 ---

No. 11 
Pn.::vcn-
tion of 
Pollution 
Basin 
Water 
Board may 
take 
measures 
to remedy 
effects of 
pollution 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(5) Where the Groundwater Controlled Area is established for 
purposes of water supply or commercial, industrial or agricultural 
development, the Basin Water Board may order the Water Supply and 
Sanitation Authority or commercial, industrial, agricultural developer or 
any other beneficiary to pay any compensation payable. 
(e) Prevention of Pollution 
39 .-( 1) An o\\ner or occupier ofland on which any activity or process 
is or was performed or undertaken, or any other situation exists which 
causes has caused or is likely to cause pollution of a water source, shall 
take all reasonable measures to prevent any such pollution from occurring, 
continuing or recurring. 
(2) A Basin Water Board may direct any person who fails to take 
the measures required under subsection (1) to-
(a) commence taking measures before a given date; 
(b) diligently continue with those measures; or 
(c) complete the measures before a given date. 
40.-( 1) Where a person fails to comply or complies inadequately 
with a directive given under Section 39(2), the Basin Water Board may 
take measures as it considers necessary to remedy the situation. 
(2) ABa•sin Water Board may recover all reasonable and justifiable 
costs incurred as a result of the Board taking action under subsection ( 1) 
jointly and severally from the following persons-
(a) any person who is or was responsible for, or who directly or 
indirectly contributed to, the pollution or the potential pollution; 
(b) the owner and or occupier of the land at the time when the 
pollution or potential fur pollution occurred; and 
( c) any person who negligently failed to prevent the activity or 
process being performed or undertaken or the pollution or 
potential for pollution occurring. 
(3) Where more than one person is liable in terms of subsection (2), 
the Basin Water Board shall, at the request of any of those persons, and 
after giving them the opportunity to be heard, apportion the liability, but 
such apportionment shall not relieve any of them of their joint and several 
liabilities for the full amount of the costs. 
380 


--- PAGE 30 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
41.-(1) In this section-
(a) "incident" includes any incident or accident in which a 
substance pollutes or has the potential to pollute or have a 
detrimental effect on a water resources; and 
(b) "responsible person" includes any person who is responsible 
for the incident or owns the substance or was in control of 
the substance involved in the incident at the time of the 
incident. 
(2) The responsible person, any other person involved in the incident 
or any person with knowledge of the incident must, as soon as is practicable 
;1fter obtaining knowledge of the incident, report the incident to the Basin 
Water Board or any public officer. 
(3) A responsible person shall-
(a) take all reasonable measures to contain and minimise the 
effects of the incident; 
(b) undertake clean-up procedures; and 
( c) take such measures as the Basin Water Board may verbally 
or in writing direct, and any verbal directions shall be 
confirmed in writing within fourteen days to have effect under 
this subsection. 
(4) Where responsible person fails to carries out or carry out 
inadequately the measures set out in subsection (3), the Basin Water 
Board may take measures as it considers necessary to remedy the situation 
and the provisions of section 40(2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutan9is 
to the recovery of costs incurred by the Basin Water Board. 
42. Where an emergency pollution incident arises, a Basin Water 
Board shall, immediately upon being informed of the incident reported in 
accordance with the provisions of section 41(2), take all reasonable 
measures to advise and continue advising water users likely to be affected 
by the pollution incident of-
(a) the nature of the incident; 
(b) the risk to water users in continuing to use water from the 
water resource; and 
( c) the period during which the risk shall continue, 
until the effects of such incident have been mitigated and the risk to 
water users has ended. 
381 
2009 
Control 
oJ 
emerge-
ncy 
pollution 
incidents 
Duty 
and 
emerge-
ncy 
powers 
of Basin 
Water 
Boards 


--- PAGE 31 ---

No. 11 
Uses that 
are subject 
to water 
use permit 
Offence for 
use of 
water in 
excess ofa 
water use 
pennit 
Grant of 
water use 
permits 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
PART VII 
WATER ABSTRACTION AND USE 
(a) Water Use Permits 
43.-(1) Without prejudice to sections 11, 12 and 52, any person who 
diverts, dams, stores, abstracts or uses water frem surface or underground 
water source, or for any such purpose constructs or maintains any works, 
shall apply for a Water Use Permit in accordance with this Act. 
(2) A Water Use Permit shall be issued taking into account water 
needed for i;1on-abstraction uses or for maintaining environmental flow 
requirements. 
(3) No permit or licence issued under any other law may apply to a 
watercourse without a written authorisation of the Basin Water Board. 
(4) The application for a Water Use Permit shall be made in 
accordance with section 75 of this Act and shall be subject to the financial 
provisions set out in section 96. 
44.-{ 1) Any person who, contrary to the provisions of this Act, diverts, 
dams, stores, abstracts or uses water or who, being the holder of a Water 
Use Permit or the occupier of any land to which a Water Use Permit has 
been made appurtenant, abstracts or uses water in excess of that 
authorised or for a purpose other than that authorised, commits an offence. 
(2) Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) shall be 
liable to a fine of not less than three hundred thousand shillings and not 
more than five hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term 
of not less than two months and not more than six months or, in the case 
of a second or subsequent offence, to such fine or imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment, 
and, in every case where the offence is a continuing one, to an additional 
fine of not less than fifty thousand shillings in respect of every day during 
which the offence continues. 
· 
45.-( 1) A Basin Water Board may grant to any person a permit to 
divert, dam, store, abstract and use water from such source, in such 
quantity, and for such purpose and under such conditions and for such 
period as may be specified in the Water Use Permit. . 
• > 
382 


--- PAGE 32 ---

No. 11 
/Vuter Resources Hanagement 
2009 
--------------
· (2) The basin Water Board may grant the applicant a temporary 
Water Use Permit for any purpose under such conditions as may be 
deemed fit.. 
(3) \ permit holder may use any saved water through improvement 
of watc use efficiency or diversification for any purposes other than 
those in the pennit will, :he cons.nt of the Basin Water Board. 
(4) A water use pe1mit holdu may, with the consent of the Basin 
Water Board, trade his right to ust water to any one and for any duration 
provided that the duration rf the permit is not exceeded. 
(5) The Minister may m;;ke Regulations prescribing the trading of 
water use permit. 
46. Nothing in any Wate. Use Permit granted under this Part shall 
be deemed to imply any guarantee that the quality and quantity of water 
referred to is, or sh..ill be available. 
47.-( 1) A Basin Water Soard may, either at the time of the grant or 
at any time after tlle grant of any Water Use Pem1it, declare that such 
permit shall be ap;mrtenant to land described in the Water Use Permit 
and ma:· at ar1y tin·.; declare an existing permit to be appurtenant to land 
affected thereby. 
(2) Where a Water Use Permit has been declared to be appurtenant 
to any land, th, benefit of the pennit shall be enjoyed and may be enforced 
by the person who is for the time being entitled to the possession of the 
land. 
(3) Where in consequence of any transfer, lease or partition, any 
person becomes entitled to the possession of part of the land to which a 
Water Use Permit has been declared appurtenant, he may abstract and 
use such proportion of the water the abstraction and use of which is 
permitted by the Water Use Permit as may be agreed between him and 
the persons entitled to the possession of the remainder of the land or, in 
the absence of any such agreement, as may be determined by the Basin 
Water Board. 
383 
Issuance 
of water 
use 
permits 
not to 
imply 
guaran-
teed 
quality 
and 
quantity 
Permit 
maybe 
made 
appurte-
nant to 
land 
• 


--- PAGE 33 ---

No. 11 
Conditions 
implied 
in all 
water use 
permits 
Cap 191 
Position 
when 
volume 
indequate 
to satisfy 
all 
permits 
granted in 
respect 
thereof 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(4) Where any apportionment of water has been made under the 
provisions of subsection (3) in respect of any partition ofland, the several 
amounts of water so apportioned shall be deemed to be appurtenant to 
the several parcels of such land and the benefit thereof shall be enjoyed . 
and all rights thereof may be enforced in accordance with such 
apportionment by the persons who are for the time being entitled to the 
possession of such parcels, and such rijhts shall prevail until the parcels 
shall again become merged with each other. 
(5) Any person acquiring a Water Use Permit hy agreement in 
accordance with the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, shall 
within thirty days give notice thereof in the prescribed form to the Basin 
Water Board. 
48. A holder of a Water Use Permit granted under this Part shall-
(a) not cause or allow any water to be polluted; 
(b) prevent any damage to the source from which water is taken, 
or to which water is discharged after use; 
(c) ensure the proper drainage of the land where the water is 
used to the satisfaction of the Basin Water Board; 
(d) submit any data relevant to the grant of any Water User 
Permit under this Act within such time as the Basin Water 
Board may prescribe; 
(e) observe conditions and regulations made under this Act; 
(f) observe any special conditions that may be attached to the 
Water Use Permit; 
(g) ensure efficient use of water ; and 
(h) comply with section 60 of the Environment Management 
Act. 
49.- (1) Where in the opinion of the Basin Water Board, in any 
specified area, the volume of water to which Water Use Permits exist is 
insufficient to satisfy all such permits, the Basin Water Board may review 
the use, diversion, control and allocation of water in that area and in so 
doing may revise the quantity allow@d by any Water Use Permit and the 
terms and conditions of any Water Use Permit to the use of water in that 
area. 
384 


--- PAGE 34 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(2) In revising Water Use Permits under subsection (1) the Basin 
Water Board shall have regard to-
( a) the principle that where beneficial use of the whole permit 
has been maintained, no permit shall be cancelled or reduced 
except in proportion with all other permits granted for the 
same purpose, in the same area; 
(b) the minimum water requirements for the health and sanitation 
of the population; and 
( c) the minimum water requirements in terms of quality and 
quantity to sustain the aquatic ecosystem on the basis of 
available information. 
50.-(1) The Basin Water Board may at any time, in respect of any 
Water Use Penni t to the use of an unspecified quantity of water, specify 
the quantity of water for which that Water Use Permit applies and regard 
shall be given to the beneficial use of such water. 
(2) The Basin Water Board may at any time in respect of any Water 
Use Permit granted prior to the entry into force of this Act for the use of 
water for an indefinite period of time, specify the duration of such water 
use permit. 
(3) Any Water Use Permits modified pursuant to subsections (1) and 
(2) shall be recorded in the Water Register. 
(b) Recording of Unregistered Rights 
51.-(1) Any person who, for an uninterrupted period of more than 
five years, has abstracted and used water beneficially from such source 
for any purpose other than domestic purposes, without a permit or right 
for such use registered in the water re3ister, shall be entitled to a Water 
Use Permit for such purpose upon application to the Basin Water Board 
provided that such application shall be made within two years after the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) The Basin Water Board may, in accordance with this Act-
(a) set any condition as may be deemed fit on the Water Use 
Permit to be issued under this section; 
(b) specify the amount of water which may be abstracted and 
used if the claim entails an unspecified amount of water; 
and 
( c) specify the duration of the Water Use Permit. 
385 
2009 
• 
Situations 
where 
quantity 
or 
duration 
is unspe-
cified 
Record-
ing 
of 
unregi-
stered 
rights 


--- PAGE 35 ---

• 
No. 11 
Incidents 
of 
custom-
ary 
water 
rights 
Applica-
tion for 
water use 
permits 
by 
custom-
ary water 
users 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(3) Failure to apply for a Water Use Permit within two years after 
commencement of this Act shall result into the expiry pf the entitlement 
to t];ie perrriit under this section. 
( 4) No application fee shall be payable for a Water Use Permit 
application made under this section . 
(5) An application under subsection (1) shall be subject to the 
procedures specified in section 7 5. 
52.-(1) Customary rights held by any person or community in a 
watercourse shall be recognised and is in every respect of equal status and 
effect to a granted right and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be-
(a) capable of being recorded by a Basin Water Board in favour 
of an individual, a family, a group of two or more individuals 
• 
whether or not are associated together under any law; 
(b) capable of being of indefinite duration, provided that the Basin 
Water Board may set a duration and the amount of water to 
be abstracted, upon the recording of such rights: 
( c) governed by customary law in respect of any dealings, 
between persons using the ,vater source withm the Basin 
Water Board having jurisdiction over the water resource or 
facility: and 
( d) may be subject to a premium or an annual payment, which 
may be varied from time to time. 
(2) The procedure for the acquisition or variation of Water Use 
Permits under this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to the acquisition or 
variation of recorded customary water rights. 
53.-(1) A person, a family unit, a group of persons recognised as 
. 
such under customary law or who have formed themselves together as 
an association, cooperative society or as any other body recognised by 
any law which permits that body to be formed, may apply to the Basin 
Water Board for grant of a Water Use Permit. 
(2) An application for a grant of a Water Use Permit shall be as 
prescribed under section 7 5 of this Act 
386 


--- PAGE 36 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(c) Groundwater Permit 
54.-{ 1) Notwithstanding section 11 (3 ), any person who intends to 
construct, sink, enlarge, or deepen a well or borehole in an Groundwater 
Controlled Area declared under section 3 8 or any other area, shall apply 
for a Groundwater Permit in accordance with this Act. 
(2) The application for a Groundwater Pennit shall be made in 
accordance with section 75. 
(3) An application for a Groundwater Permit shall be construed as 
an application for the use of the w&ter abstracted from such well or 
borehole in accordance with this Part of the Act, subject to inspection of 
the well or borehole by the Basin Water Board. 
55.- (J) Any person who, contrary to the provisions of the Act, 
constructs, sinks or enlarges a well or borehole without a Groundwater 
Permit duly granted by the Basin Water Board commits an offence. 
(2) Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) shall, on 
conviction be liable to a fine ofnot less than five hundred thousand shillings 
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both such fine 
and imprisonment, and in every case where the offence is a continuing 
one to an additional fine of not less than fifty thousand shillings in respect 
of every case 
S6.-{ 1) No person shall be granted a Groundwater Permit for any well 
or borehole within distances prescribed under subsection (2) of this section. 
(2) The Minister may, for any area of Mainland Tanzania, prescribe 
in regulations.the minimum distances for the sinking, enlargement or 
deepening of wells or boreholes. 
57. Any person lawfully engaged in drilling or exploring activities 
shall keep and submit any relevant data on groundwater to the Basin 
Water Board. 
; 
58 .. The holder of a special mining licence or a prospecting licences 
granted under the Mining Act, or a petroleum prospecting licence who 
encounters groundwater in any workings carried out under such licence 
shall-
(a) promptly notify the Basin Water Board of any such waters; 
387 
2009 
Duty to 
apply for 
aground-
water 
permit to 
construct 
or enlarge 
wells 
Offence 
in 
respect 
of failure 
to obtain 
aground• 
water 
permit 
Distance 
limits for 
sinking of 
wells or 
boreholes 
Sub-
mission 
of data to 
the Basin 
Water 
Board 
Ground-
water 
encoun-
tered in 
mining 
operations 
Cap. 123 
• 


--- PAGE 37 ---

No. 11 
Obliga- . 
tion 
to seal a 
well no 
longer 
in use 
Waste of 
ground-
water 
Powers of 
Basin 
Water 
Board in 
relation to 
aquifers 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(b) submit any relevant data to the Basin Water Board; 
( c) take all such measures necessary for the protection of 
groundwater against pollution; and 
( d) comply with any directions of the Basin Water Board regarding 
the protection or disposal of such water. 
59. An operator of a well or borehole that has ceased to be in use 
shall-
(a) adequately seal the well or borehole to prevent pollution and 
to prevent injury to any other person; and 
(b) promptly notify the Basin Water Board which upon receipt of 
such notification shall forthwith cancel the Groundwater Permit 
60.--'(l) Subject to subsectfon (2) of this section, no person shall 
cause or allow any groundwater to run to waste from any borehole except 
for the purpose of testing the quantity or quality of the supply or cleaning, 
sterilising, examining or repairing the borehole. 
(2) Where groundwater interferes or threatens to interfere with the 
execution or operation of any underground works, it shall be lawful under 
this subsection to cause or allow the water to run to waste so far as it is 
necessary for the works to be executed or operated, where no other 
method of disposing of the water is reasonably practicable. 
61.-(1) The Basin Water Board shall have power to-
(a) determine the safe yield of any aquifer for the purpose of 
guiding determinations concerning the abstraction and use 
of water from the aquifer; 
(b) require that an aquifer be used on a sustainable basis including, 
but not limited to, restricting abstractions so that they do not 
individually or collectively exceed the safe yield of the aquifer; 
( c) impose special requirements and restrictions with respect to 
artesian wells, for the purpose of preventing waste or 
contamination of water, or loss of artesian pressure; and 
(d) carry out programmes for the recharge of aquifers. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, "safe yield" means the amount 
of water which may be abstracted from an aquifer at a rate that shall not 
reduce the supply to such an extent as may render such abstraction 
hannful to the aquifer, to the quality of the water or to the environment. 
388 


--- PAGE 38 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
62. The Minister shall, in consultation with relevant authorities, make 
regulations that require any person who undertakes works relating to 
groundwater prospecting, construction or enlargement of a well or 
borehole to be licensed and carried out in such manner and under such 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
( d) Discharge Permits 
63.-(1) A person who wishes to discharge effluents from any 
commercial, industrial or agricultural source or from any sewerage works 
or_ trade waste systems or from any other source into surface water or 
underground strata shall apply to the Basin Water Board for a Discharge 
Permit in accordance with this Act. 
(2) The application for a Discharge Permit shall be made in 
accordance with section 75 of this Act. 
64.-( l) A person commits an offence who, unless authorised under 
the conditions of a Discharge Permit issued in accordance with this Part, 
causes or allows-
( a) waste or effluent to come into contact with any water; 
(b) waste or effluent to be discharged directly or indirectly into 
water; or 
( c) water to be polluted by waste or effluent. 
(2) The provisions of subsection ( 1 ), shall apply to any Discharge 
Permit containing conditions on the treatment or discharge of effluent. 
(3) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection ( 1 ), proof of 
the existence of a pipe, drain, pond, pump or other means whereby waste 
may be conveyed, retained or deposited as to come into contact, directly 
or indirectly, with water, shall be prima facie evidence of pollution of 
that water. 
( 4) A person contravening the provisions of subsection ( l ), shall be 
liable on conviction-
(a) to pay the cost of remedying the damage caused and 
reinstating the quality of the water, as far as is possible, to 
the condition that would have existed where the damage 
was not caused; and 
(b) to a fine of not less than three hundred thousand shillings or 
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to 
both fine and imprisonment and in case of subsequent 
conviction, to a fine not less than five hundred thousand 
389 
2009 
Power to 
regulate 
the 
profession 
of 
ground-
water 
drilling 
Discharge 
permit 
Offences 
in respect 
to water 
pollution 


--- PAGE 39 ---

No. 11 
Water. 
quality 
and . 
effluent 
standards 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
shillings or to imprisonment not exceeding two years or to 
both fine and imprisonment and in case of continuation of 
the offence, to an additional fine not less than fifty thousand 
shillings in respect of every day during which the offence 
has continued. 
(5) Where a person fails to comply with the provisions of subsection 
(4) (a) the Basin Water Board may apply to court for an enforcement of 
the compliance with the provisions, and may enter any land and take 
such measures as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the 
provisions. 
(6) In any proceedings under subsection (4) (a) of this section, the 
court may, on application by the Basin Water Board, require that person 
to pay into Court a sum not being less than eighty percent of the cost 
estimated by the Basin Water Board of remedying the damage caused 
and reinstating the quality of the water. 
f 
65.-(1) Without prejudice to subsection (2), the Minister may by 
order published in the Gazette designate water quality laboratories 
responsible for freshwater resources to be laboratories which may, among 
other things, be used for analytical and reference for purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) The Designated Water Quality Laboratories shall undertake 
assessment of water quality and analysis of waste water in accordance 
with water quality standards prescribed under the Environmental 
Management Act. 
(3) The water quality and effluent standards to be applied to the 
Cap 191 
Discharge Permits shall be made and published by the Minister responsible 
for environment as national environmental quality standards under the 
Environmental Management Act. 
C~ndi-
tions to 
be 
attached 
to a 
discharge 
permit 
(4) The holder of a Discharge Permit shall comply with the water 
quality and effluent standards formulated under subsection (3). 
(5) In granting or renewing a Discharge Permit, the Basin Water 
Board shall have regard to any classification of any water resource made 
in accordance with section 32. 
66. A Basin Water Board may attach any conditions to a Discharge 
Permit as it may deem fit and such conditions may determine-
(a) the nature, composition and volume of the effluent or other 
390 


--- PAGE 40 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
matter to be discharged; 
(b) the receiving water or underground strata into which effluents 
may be discharged; 
( c) measures to be taken for protecting water contained in other 
underground strata through which any well, borehole or pipe 
containing the effluent or other matter shall pass; 
( d) provision of facilities for inspection; and 
( e) provision of any other data related to the grant of the permit 
as the Basin Water Board may specify. 
67.-(1) Where an application for a Discharge Permit relates to an 
outfall from which pollutants are already being discharged, the Basin 
Water Board may grant a provisional permit to pischarge, authorising the 
continuation of a discharge subject to such terms and conditions as may 
be prescribed in the provisional permit. 
(2) The provisional permit granted under subsection (1) of this section 
shall expire upon a final decision with regard to the grant of a permit fo 
discharge by the Basin Water Board. 
68. No person to whom a Discharge Permit has been granted under 
section 66, may discharge into underground strata or groundwater 
recharge area. 
( e) General Provisions Relating to Water Use, G.roundwater and 
Discharge Permits 
69.-( 1) Any person who is the holder of a water right or permit to 
discharge effluent or a permit to construct, sink, enlarge or deepen a well 
or borehole issued under the Water Utilization (Control and Regulation) 
Act, shall be entitled to a Water Use Permit, Discharge Permit or 
Groundwater Permit under this Act for such purpose upon application to 
the Basin Water Board provided that such application shall be made 
within two years after the commencement of this Act. 
(2) The Basin Water Board may. in accordance with this Act-
( a) set any condition as may be deemed fit on the Permit to be 
issued under this section; 
(b) specify the amount of water which may be abstracted and 
used or the volume of effluent discharged ifthe claim entails 
an unspecified amount of water; and 
( c) specify the duration of the Water Use Permit. 
391 
2009 
Provi-
sional 
discharge 
permit 
Prohibi-
tion on 
discharge 
to 
ground-
water 
Entitle-
ment to 
an 
existing 
right or 
permit 
Cap.331 


--- PAGE 41 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
Cap. 331 
(3) Failure to apply for a Water Use Permit, Discharge Permit or 
Duration 
ofa water 
use 
permit or 
a 
discharge 
permit 
I 
Variation 
ofa 
permit 
with 
consent 
Decrala-
tion for 
public 
purpose 
Groundwater Permit within two years after commencement of this Act 
shall result in the expiry of such rights as were granted under the Water 
Utilization (Control and Regulation) Act. 
( 4) A nominal application fee shall be payable for a permit application 
made under this section. 
(5) An application under subsection (1) shall be subject to the 
procedures specified in section 75. · 
70. In granting a Water Use Permit or a Discharge Permit, the Basin 
Water Board shall define a reasonable duration for such Permit, while 
· considering-
(a) the purpose for which the water is to be used or effluent is 
discharged; and 
(b) the amount of monetary investment related to the use of 
water or effluent discharge and a reasonable period of time 
normally r1quired to recover such investment. 
71. -{1) A Basin Water Board may, at any time on the application or 
with the consent of the holder of a Water Use Permit or a Discharge 
Permit, determine or diminish such Water Use Permit, or vary any of its 
conditions in .the event that-
(a) the source does not satisfy the demands; 
(b) the grantee has not used the permit in three consecutive 
years; or 
(c) the discharge of effluents may be injurious to the public. 
(2) The consent under subsection (1) shall not be unreasonable 
withheld. 
72.-(1) In the general interest of the public, the Minister may declare 
water to be required for a public purpose for any river basin or sub-basin. 
(2) Water shall be deemed to be required for a public purpose where 
it is required for any of the following uses-
(a) the supply of water to any city, municipality, township, minor 
settlement or rural area; 
(b) fire fighting; 
( c) the protection of ecosystems within protected areas of 
Mainland Tanzania; or 
( d) providing for disasters. 
392 


--- PAGE 42 ---

• 
No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(3) Where a Basin Water Board is satisfied that it is required for a 
public purpose to determine or diminish a Water Use Permit or a Discharge 
Permit, the Board may, by notice in writing addressed to the holder of 
such permit, determine or diminish that permit to the extent that such 
determination or diminution is required for th~ aforesaid public purpose, 
and thereupon the permit shall cease or shall be exercisable only as so 
varied, as the case may be. 
(4) The holder of any permit determined or diminished under the 
provisions of this section shall be entitled to compensation pursuant to 
section 107. 
73.-( 1) The Minister may make regulations that allow persons who 
hold a Water Use Permit or a Discharge Permit or a Groundwater Permit 
to transfer such permit to another person, provided that-: 
(a) such transfer shall be subject to approval of the Basin Wat.er 
Board; 
(b) all terms and conditions under which a transfer of a permit 
has been agreed shall be submitted to the Basin Water Board 
with the application for approval; 
( c) in case a transfer is approved by the Basin Water Board, the 
conditions subject to which the permit was granted may be 
modified; and 
( d) water shall be used for the same purpose as prescribed in the 
permit after the transfer of a permit to the use of such water. 
(2) No transfer shall be approved if it is in contravention of a Water 
Resources Management Plan made under section 31. 
(3) The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, decide to 
apply the regulations made under subsection (1) to a limited area within 
Mainland Tanzania. 
(4) The power provided under subsection.(}) shall not be exercised 
until after the terms and deadlines for the registration of non-registered 
rights have expired. 
(5) The Basin Water Board may approve the temporary or permanent 
transfer of a Water Use Permit that has been made appurtenant to land, 
2009 
Transfer 
of 
permits 
provided that the application for such approval is made by the holder of 
Caps. I 13 . 
the Right of Occupancy granted under the Land Act, or the Villages 
and I 14 
Land Act. 
393 
... 


--- PAGE 43 ---

d' 
No. 11 
Condi-
tions to 
be 
attached 
on water 
use and 
discharge 
permits 
Applica-
tion 
procedure 
Determi-
nation for 
·breach of 
condi-
tions of a 
permit 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(6) The transfer, for a limited period of time, of a Water Use Permit 
that has been made appurtenant to land, shall not affect the appurtenance 
of the Water Use Permit to that land. 
(7) A Water Use Permit granted for agricultural purposes may be 
transferred temporarily for a period not exceeding one year. 
(8) Permits issued pursuant to this Part shall pass on to a successor-
in-title to the named permit holder, provided that passage of the permit to 
a successor-in-title shall not extend the term of duration of the permit. 
74. Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 48 and 66, a Basin 
Water Board may attach any condition to a Water Use Permit or a 
Discharge Permit as may be deemed fit, and such conditions may require-
( a) the conduct of an Environmental Impact Assessment; 
. (b) the membership of a water users association as provided for 
in Part VIII of this Act; 
( c) the payment of compensation to any other person; 
(d) the construction of works, including technical specifications 
thereof; 
( e) the variation of volumes of water taken or effluents discharged 
depending on the seasonal variation of flows in the water 
resources; 
( f) the payment of fees for the use of water in the amount 
prescribed by the Basin Water Board,; and 
(g) the payment of fees for the discharge of effluents in the 
amount prescribed by the Basin Water Board. 
75.-{ 1) Application for a Water Use Permit or a Groundwater Permit 
or a Discharge Permit shall be made in the form and in accordance with 
the procedure prescribed by the Minister in the Gazette. 
(2) An interested person may notify the Water Officer that he objects 
to the grant of a water right and may specify the grounds for such objection 
and shall, if so required, have a right to be heard by the Basis Water 
Board. 
76.-(1) The Basin Water Board may by notice in writing addressed 
to the holder declare any permit to be in breach of the conditions of a 
permit where the holder of a permit has-
(a) failed to comply with any condition, express or implied, subject 
to which the permit was granted; 
394 


--- PAGE 44 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(b) abstracted or used water in excess of that authorised or has 
used water for a purpose not authorised by the permit; 
(c) discharged effluents iri excess of the levels authorised under 
a Discharge Permit; and 
(d) constructed any well or borehole, or enlarged or deepened 
any well or borehole in breach of any conditions or 
specifications in a Groundwater Permit. 
(2) Where the default is one capable of being remedied, the Basin 
Water Board shall first serve on the holder notice in writing specifying 
the default and requiring the holder to remedy the same within such 
reasonable time as may be specified in the notice. 
77 .-( 1) Where at any time a Basin Water Board has reason to 
believe that the holder of a permit under this Act has not, during the 
preceding three years, made full beneficial use of that permit, the Basin 
Water Board may by notice in writing addressed to such holder call upon 
him to show cause why such permit shall not be determined or diminished 
or modified in such respects as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) Where within three months of the service of such notice no reply 
has been received by the Basin Water Board, the permit may be declared 
determined or diminished or modified, as the case may be. 
(3) The holder of a permit upon whom a notice has been served 
under subsection (I) may, within three months of such service, submit to 
the Basin Water Board a statement in writing of reasons why the permit 
shall not be determined or diminished or modified, as the case may be, or 
may require to be heard in the matter. 
(4) The Basin Water Board shall consider any statement submitted 
under subsection (3) and shall, if so required, give the holder an opportunity 
of being heard in person or by an advocate and may thereafter by notice 
in writing addressed to the holder-
(a) declare the permit detem1ined; 
(b) declare the permit varied in such respects as may be specified 
in the declaration; or 
(c) declare the permit to be subsisting unchanged. 
395 
280, 
Notice to 
show 
cause for 
misuse of 
a permit 


--- PAGE 45 ---

No. 11 
Keeping 
ofa 
Water 
Register 
by Basin 
Water 
Boards 
Caps.117 
and334 
Keeping 
ofa 
National 
Water 
Register 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(0 Water Register 
78.-(1) Every Basin Water Board shall keep a Water Register for 
the registration of-
( a) every grant or renewal of a Water Use Permit and of the 
variation, determination or modification or suspension of such 
Water Use Permit; 
(b) every grant or renewal of a Discharge Permit made by the 
Board and of the variation, determination or modification or 
suspension of such Discharge Permit; 
( c) every grant or renewal of a Groundwater Permit made by 
the Basin Water Board and of the variation, determination 
or modification or suspension of such Groundwater Permit; 
(d) any easement created or determined by the Board; and 
(e) any Water Users Association established under Part VIII. 
(2) Any person shall, on application to a Basin Water Board, be 
entitled to receive certified extracts from the Water Register maintained 
by such Basin Water Board under subsection ( 1 ), upon payment of 
prescribed fees. 
(3) Extracts from any Water Register under subsection (1) certified 
to be under the hand of a Basin Water Board shall be admissible in 
evidence in all legal proceedings, civil or criminal, without proof that they 
are under the hand of the Basin Water Board purported to have certified 
the same and shall also be conclusive prima facie evidence of recorded 
facts. 
( 4) The entry of any easement in a Water Register under subsection 
( 1) shall not affect any requirements as to registration contained in, or be 
construed as being an effective registration for the purposes of, or in lieu 
of registration under the provisions of the Registration of Documents Act 
and Land Registration Act. 
(5) Notwithstanding the specific provisions of subsection (1), the 
Water Register shall also contain copies of-
( a) any rules or regulations made under this Act; and 
(b) annual reports, audited accounts and auditors' statements of 
the Basin Water Board. 
79.-(1) The Director of Water Resources shall establish a National 
Water Register of Water Use Permits, Discharge Permits, Groundwater 
Permits, easements granted underthisAct, and Water Users Associations 
established under this Act. 
396 


--- PAGE 46 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(2) Every Basin Water Board shall supply without delay to the National 
Water Board a copy of every entry made in the Water Register and shall, 
upon application being made to the Director of Water Resources by any 
Basin Water Board or public officer, forthwith provide without fee a 
copy of any entry in the National Water Register. 
(3) Notwithstanding the specific provisions of subsection (1), the 
National Water Register shall also contain copies of-
(a) any rules or regulations made under this Act; 
(b) annual reports, audited accounts and auditors' statements of 
the Basin Water Boards; and 
( c) such other records or information as may be required by the 
Minister. 
PART VIII 
WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS 
80.-( 1) A Water Users Association may be formed by the agreement 
of the majority of a group of water users for one or a combination of the 
following purposes to-
( a) manage, distribute and conserve water from a source used 
jointly by the members of the water users association; 
(b) acquire and operate any Permit under the provisions of this 
Act; 
( c) resolve conflicts between members of the association related 
to the joint use of a water resource; 
. 
(d) collect water user fees on behalf of the Basin Water Board; 
and 
( e) represent the special interests and values arising from water 
used for a public purpose, such as in an environmental or 
conservation area, or for the purpose of managing a 
Groundwater Controlled Area. 
(2) The Association of water users for the purpose of subsection ( 1) 
shall comprise of any user of water fr.om a common stream irrespective 
of the purpose of that use. 
81.-( 1) Water users intending to form an association shall prepare a 
Constitution in the form set out in the Fourth Schedule and submit such 
Constitution to the Basin Water Board for approval in accordance with 
the procedure as the Minister may prescribe in regulations made under 
this Act. 
(2) Upon request of a group of water users intending to establish an 
397 
• 
2009 
Establish-
ment and 
purposes 
of a water 
users 
association 
Approval 
and 
registration 
of water 
users 
associa-
tions 


--- PAGE 47 ---

,No. 11 
Registra-
tion of 
water 
users 
associa-
Power of 
Basin 
Water 
Board to 
give 
directions 
Powers 
ofBasin 
Water 
Boards 
to 
undertake 
works 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
Association, the Basin Water Board shall provide assistance in formulating 
the Constitution. 
(3) Members of the water users lssociation shall elect a Management 
Committee for each association which shall be the executive organ of 
the Association and shall be elected and have the powers as set out in the 
Constitution prepared under subsection (1). 
82.-( 1) Upon approval of the Constitution by the Basin Water Board, 
the Association shall be reijistered in the Water Register maintained by 
the Basin Water Board. 
(2) With effect from the date ofregistration in the Water Register, all 
water users within the area of an association as defined in the Constitution 
shall be required to become members of the association and shall be 
bound by the Constitution. 
(3) The Basin Water Board shall cause membership of an association 
to be recorded on the Water Use Permit of each member issued in 
accordance with Part VII of this Act and in the Water Register maintained 
by the Basin Water Board. 
83.-(1) In any case where the Basin Water Board is satisfied that 
the Association does not perform its functions satisfactorily, it may give 
directions to the Association relating to the performance of it functions. 
(2) The directions referred to under subsection ( 1) may relate to-
(a) the division and distribution of water amongst the members 
of an association; 
(b) the management and protection of any water source; 
( c) the drainage of the land where water is used; and 
(d) any other matter which the Basin Water Board considers 
necessary or desirable. 
PART lX 
PROVISIONS RELATED TO WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT WORKS 
84.-( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Water Resources 
Management Plan, a Basin Water Board may for purposes of sustainable 
development of water resources or the performance of any of its functions 
under this Act-
(a) construct, use or operate any works; and 
(b) divert, extract and impound the water from any water course 
or borehole or alter the course of any water course. 
398 


--- PAGE 48 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(2) Any land need for purposes of subsection ( 1) may be acquired in Cap 
accordance with the procedures stipulated under the Land Acquisition 
Nos. 118 
Act and the Land Act. 
· 
and 113 
85. Where a Basin Water Board has granted a Water Use Permit or 
a Discharge Permit subject to the construction or alteration of works, the 
Basin Water Board shall have powers to monitor and enforce the 
requirement for such construction or alteration of works in accordance 
with regulations made by the Minister. 
PARTX 
DAM SAFETY AND FLOOD MANAGEMENT 
86. In this Part-
" approved professional person" means a person capable of undertaking 
dam safety and risk analysis and is registered in terms of Engineers 
Registration Act, and the Construction Registration Act and approved 
by the Director after consultation with Engineers Registration Board 
and the Contractors Registration Board and appropriate statutory 
bodies.; 
"dam" includes any existing or proposed structure which is capable of 
containing, storing or impounding water, including temporary 
impoundment or storage, whether that water contains any substance 
or not; 
"dam with a safety risk" means any dam-
(a) which can contain, store or dam more than 50,000 cubic metres 
of water, whether that water contains any substance or not, and 
which has a wall of a vertical height of more than five metres, 
measured as the vertical difference between the lowest 
downstream ground elevation on the outside of the dam wall and 
the non-overspill crest level or the general top level of the dam 
wall; 
(b) tailings dam which impounds a mine whose principal use is for 
storage of mine tailings, but may have secondary use for the 
storage of mine process water; or 
( c) belonging to a category of dams declared under section 91 to be 
dams with a safety risk. 
"owner of a dam" includes the person in control of that dam; 
"tailings" means fine materials in suspension which are discharged from 
an ore concentrator or coal washing plant; 
399 
Powers of 
basin 
water 
boards in 
respect of 
permits 
conditional 
on 
construc-
tion of 
works 
Interpre-
tation 
Caps. 63 
and235 
• 


--- PAGE 49 ---

No. 11 
Blockage 
ofwater-
counes 
Control 
measures 
for dams 
with 
safety 
risk 
Cap. 191 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
"tailings dam" means a itructure constructed to create a tailings pond for 
storing mining tailings and process water; and 
"task" includes a task relating to designing, constructing, altering, repairing, 
impounding water in, operating, evaluating the safety of, maintaining, 
monitoring or abandoning a dam with a safety risk. 
87.-(1) No person shall engage in any construction activity that 
blocks or otherwise impedes the flow of water in a watercourse unless a 
permit authorizing the activity has been obtained in accordance with the 
provisions of Part VII. 
(2) The Director or Basin Water Officer may take all reasonable 
measures to remove or to mitigate the effects of an unauthorised blockage 
of a watercourse and may recover the cost of such measures from the 
person or persons responsible for the blockage. 
(3) Any person responsible for causing unauthorised blockage of a 
watercourse shall be responsible for any damage to persons, property, or 
the environment caused by the unauthorised blockage, which damage 
shall be determined and assessed by a court of law. 
(4) The Director or Basin Water Officer may bring an action for 
damage against any person or persons responsible for the blockage of a 
watercourse, for the purpose of compensation for any damage to the 
environment and other uses down stream caused by the blockage. 
88.-(1) The owner of a dam shall-
(a) before submitting an application for a Water Use Pem1it in 
accordance with the provisions of Part VII or within the 
perictd specified, provide the Basin Water Officer and the 
Director with-
(i) any information, drawings, specifications, design 
assumptions, calculations, documents and test results 
requested by the Director or the Basin Water Officer; 
(ii) a copy of the statement and certificate issued in 
accordance with the provisions of Part V of the 
Environmental Management Act; and 
(b) give any person authorised by the Director access to that 
dam, to enable that authorized officer to dete1mine whether-
(i\ that dam has safety risk; 
400 . ·, 
.. 


--- PAGE 50 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(ii) that dam shall be declared to be a dam with a safety risk; 
(iii) a directive shall be issued for speci ficrepairs oralterations 
· to that dam; or 
(iv) the owner has complied with any provisions of this Act 
applicable to that dam. 
(2) The Director may by notice in the Gazette declare a category of 
dams to be dams with a safety risk. 
(3) The Director may direct the owner of a dam with a safety risk 
to-
(a) submit, at the owner's cost, and within a period specified by 
the Director, a report by an approved professional person 
regarding the safety of that dam; and 
(b) undertake, at the owner's cost, and within a period specified 
by the Director, any specific repairs or alterations to that 
dam which are necessary to protect the public, property or 
the resource quality from a risk of failure of the dam. 
(4) The Director shall afford affected persons the opportunity to 
petition for the review and evaluation of any dam reasonably believed to 
be a dam with a safety risk and shall provide the owner of any <lain that 
is the subject of such a petition, a right to respond. 
(5) Where the owner of the dam (ails to comply with the directive 
contemplated in subsection (3 )(b ), within the period specified, the Director 
may undertake the repairs or alterations and recover the costs from the 
owner. 
(6) Before issuing a directive, the Director shall-
(a) be satisfied that the repairs or alterations directed are 
necessary, adequate, effective and appropriate to reduce the 
risk to an acceptable level; and 
(b) consider the impact on public safety, property, the resourc_e 
quality and socio-economic aspects if the dam fails. 
89.--( 1) When carrying out a task in terms of this Part, an approved 
professional person shall equally assume the duty of care towards the 
Government and the general public. 
· 
401 
2009 
• 
Responsi-
bilities of 
approved 
profes-
sional 
persons 


--- PAGE 51 ---

·No. 11 
Registra-
tion of 
dams with 
safety 
risk 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(2) An approved professional person appointed to carry out a task on 
a dam shall-
(a) ensure that the task is carried out according to acceptable 
dam engineering practices; 
(b) keep the prescribed records; 
( c) compile the prescribed reports; and 
( d) where the task includes constructing, altering or repairing a 
dam, issue a completion certificate to the owner of the dam 
to the effect that the task on that dam has been carried ~t 
according to the applicable design, drawings alrd 
' . 
. 
specifications. 
(3) An approved professional person appointed to carry out a dam 
safety evaluation shall-
( a) consider whether the safety norms pertaining to the design, 
construction, monitoring, operation, performance and 
maintenance of the dam satisfy acceptable dam engineering 
practices; and 
(b) compile a report on the matters contemplated in subsection 
(3) (a) according to the prescribed requirements and submit 
the signed and dated report to the owner of the dam within 
the prescribed period. 
90.--( 1) The owner of a dam with or without a safety risk shall be 
required to register the dam. 
(2) An applicatiou for registration of a dam shall be made within one 
hundred and twenty days-
( a) after the date on which the dam becomes capable of containing, 
storing or impounding water; 
(b) after the date on which an already completed dam is declared 
to be a dam; or 
(c) after publication of a notice declaring a category of dams to 
be dams with a safety risk as the case may be. 
(3) A successor-in-title to the owner of a dam with or without safety 
risk shall promptly inform the Director of the succession for the substitution 
of the name of the owner. 
402 


--- PAGE 52 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
91.--{1) In declaring a category of dams or a dam to be a category 
of dam or a dams with a safety risk, the Director shall consider-
(a) the need to protect the public, property and the resource 
quality against the potential--hazard posed by the dam or 
category of dams; 
(b) the extent of potential loss or harm involved; 
( c) th~ cost of any prescribed measures and whether they are 
reasonably achievable; 
( d) the socio-economic impact if such a dam fails; 
:·• 
(e) in the case of a particular dam the Director shall also consider-
(i) the manner in which that dam is designed, constructed, 
altered, repaired, operated, inspected, maintained or 
abandoned; 
(ii) the person by who"m that dam is designed, constructed, 
altered, repaired, operated, inspected, maintained or 
abandoned;and 
(iii) the manner in which the water is contained, stored or 
impounded in that dam. 
2009 
Factors 
tobe 
considered 
in 
declaring . 
dams with 
. safety 
risk 
92.-{ 1) The ~inister may, on the recommendation of the Director, Exemp-
exempt a dam belonging to a certain category, by notice in the Gazette, 
tions 
from compliance with any provision of this Part or any regulation made 
under this Act, on conditions determined by the Minister. 
(2) The Minister may withdraw the exemption or jmpose further or 
new conditions in respect of the exemption. 
(3) Before deciding on an exemption, the Director shall consider-
(a) the degree of risk or potential risk posed by the dam or 
category of dams to public safety, property and the resource 
quality; 
(b) the manner of design, construction, alter13~ion, repair, 
impoundment of water in, operation or abandonment of the 
dam or category of dams; 
( c) the supervision involved in the dam or category of dams; 
( d) alternative measures proposed for regulating the design, 
construction, alteration, repair, operation, maintenance; 
impoundment of water in, inspection or abandonment of the 
dam or category of• dams and the effectiveness of these 
measures; 
.. 
403 


--- PAGE 53 ---

No. 11 
Review 
of Dam 
facilities 
Regula-
tions 
regarding 
dam safety 
and 
prevention 
offlood 
risk 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(c) the knowledge and expertise of the persons involved in any 
task relating to _the dam or category of dams; 
(f) comments solicited from the surrounding communities; 
(g) the costs relating to the dam or category of dams; 
(h) any security provided or intended to be provided for any 
damage which could be caused by the dam or category of 
dams; 
(i) recommendations made in an environmental impact 
assessment or an environmental audit report; and 
U) whether the dam or category of dams are permitted in terms 
of a license or any other authorization issued by or under 
any other law. 
93.-( 1) The owner of the dam with or without safety risk shall carry 
out the comprehensive facility review after every five years. 
(2) Where an earthquake or a land slide has occuned proximate to a 
dam, the owner of the darn shall carry out a periodic review of the dam. 
(3) After caITying out a comprehensive facility review or a periodic 
facility review, the owner of the dam shall submit a repoti to the Director. 
( 4) The Director shall review the report and issue directives to owner 
of the dam on remedial measures to be taken to remedy any risk. 
94.-(1) The Minister may, in relation to dam security and safety 
make regulations in r~spect of-
• 
(a) the establishment of a register of approved professional 
persons to inspect and monitor dams with a safety risk; 
(b) the provision for technical audit of the work of approved 
professional persons; 
(c) classifying dams into categories; 
( d) providing for the construction, maintenance and repair of 
dams; 
(e) requiring the owner of a dam with a safety risk to accomplish 
regular monitoring of the dam, to the extent and in the manner 
prescribed; 
(f) requiring the registration of a specific dam with a safety risk, 
404 


--- PAGE 54 ---

,, 
• 
No. 11 
Water Resources }.1anagement 
and setting out the procedure and the processing fee payable 
for registration; 
· 
(g) requiring an approved professional person appointed for a 
specific purpose for a specific dam to submit information, 
drawings, reports and manuals; 
(h) requiring the owner ofa dam with a safety risk to accomplish 
regular monitoring of the dam, to the extent and manner 
prescribed; and 
(i) specifying time periods that shall be complied with. 
(2) In making Regulations under subsection ( 1 ), the Minister shall 
consider-
(a) the expertise required for the effective design, construction, 
alteration, repair, operation, maintenance and abandonment 
of a dam in the category concerned; and 
(b) the qualifications and experience needed to provide the 
expertise for a particular category of tasks. 
(3) Before making Regulations under subsection (1), the Minister 
shall consult the Contractors Registration Board, established under the 
Contractors Registration Act, the Engineers Registration Board established 
under the Engineers Registration Act, and any other appropriate statutory 
bodies. 
95. For the purpose of preventing or minimising the risk of flooding, 
flood damage and water pollution, the Minister may-
(a) prohibit the construction on submersible lands of dikes, levees 
or other structures likely to hinder the runoff of floodwater; 
provided that authorisation may be granted for the 
development of such structures if they are determined to be 
necessary for the protection of already existing residences 
or other private structures; 
(b) alter or demolish dikes, embankments, levees, structures or 
other works, irrespective of their legal status, if they are 
determined by the Minister to hinder water runoff or to extend 
the flood plain with harmful results; 
405 
2009 
Cap. 
Nos. 63 
and 235 
Measures 
for flood 
mitigation 
and 
control 


--- PAGE 55 ---

No. 11 
Water 
abstraction 
charges 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
( c) prohibit the growing of crops, the building of structures or the 
placing of deposits on land located between a watercourse 
and any protective dikes, embankments or levees; 
( d) cooperate with local° government authorities in determining 
the geographic extent of floodplain areas and assist such 
authorities in regulating the development and use of lands 
within such areas; and 
( e) in consultation with the Minister responsible for local 
government, develop regulations providing for the control 
and management of storm water within municipal areas. 
PART XI 
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS 
96.--(1) The Basin Water Boards may, by notice in the Gazette, 
announce charges to be levied in respect of-
f 
(a) water abstraction; 
(b) ~ffluent discharge; 
( c) payment for environmental services; 
( d) granting of permits required under this Act; and 
( e) any other matter for which the Basin Water Board considers 
charges shall be made pursuant to this Act. 
(2) The water abstraction charges that may be announced by the 
Basin water Boards shall, among other things be based on a pricing strategy 
that take into consideration of-
(a) the need to differentiate among geographical areas, categories 
of water uses and water users; 
(b) the need to achieve an equitable and efficient allocation of 
water and water conservation; 
(c) the compliance with prescribed standards and water 
management practices based on the user pays and polluter 
pays principles; 
( d) the need to provide for incentives for timely payment of the 
charges and disincentives for non-payment; and 
( e) the value of water by using economic parameters such as 
inflation rate, market values and opportunity costs of water. 
406 


--- PAGE 56 ---

,. 
No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(4) The Minister shall make Regulations and guidelines on charges 
to be levied under this section. 
97. The charges collected shall be used for-
(a) financing water resources management, including costs of 
(i) gathering information; 
(ii) monitoring water resources and their use; 
(iii) controlling water resources; 
(iv) water resources protection, including controlling the 
discharges of waste water; and 
(v) the protection of the water sources and water 
conservation; 
(b) funding of water resources development and construction of 
waterworks, including-
(i) the costs of investigation, designing, planning and 
construction; 
(ii) the pre~financing of development; the costs of operation 
and maintenance of waterworks; and 
(iii) the costs of water distribution and ensuring equitable and 
efficient allocation of water; and 
(iv) carrying out any other activities or measures for purposes 
of improving water resources management and catchment 
conservation by the local govemment authorities, the 
Basin Water Boards, the Catchment Water Committees, 
and the Water Users Associations. 
PART XII 
TRANS-BOUNDARY WATERS 
98.-(1). The Minister may develop policies and strategies for the 
purpose: of ensuring sustainable, equitable utilisation and management of 
trans-boundary waters. 
(2) Where, the United Republic is a party to international or regional 
agreement concerning the management of trans-boundary waters the 
Minister shall-
(a) initiate and prepare legislative propos~ls for purposes of 
implementing those agreements; and 
407 
2009 
Use of 
water 
charges 
Policies, 
strategies 
and 
legislation 
in respect 
to trans-
boundary 
waters 


--- PAGE 57 ---

f 
No. 11 
Minister 
and 
manage-
ment of 
trans-
boundary 
waters 
Collection 
of data and 
informa-
tion on 
trans- · 
boundary 
waters 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(b) identify appropriate measures necessary for the 
implementation of those agreements. 
(3) The Director of Water Resources shall keep a register of all 
international and regional agreements concerning the utilisation and 
management of trans-bouhdary waters to which the United Republic is a 
party. 
99. The Minister may, in relation to trans-boundary waters-
( a) participate with neighbouring riparian states in the 
establishment and co~tinuing development of a common 
database regarding the use of trans-boundary waters; 
(b) engage in the joint management planning and development of 
joint projects including but not limited to inter-basin transfers 
with other riparian states within the trans-boundary waters 
for the purpose of promoting economic growth, equitable 
utilisation of water resources, environmental integrity and 
common understanding; 
(c) establish and promote cooperation and institutional 
relationships 'between river basin organisations within 
Mainland Tanzania and international river basin organisations; 
( d) ensure stakeholder participation as part of the development 
of the Government's position concerning trans-boundary 
waters; 
(e) develop and improve capacity of Mainland Tanzania for 
participation in shared water resource _consultations and 
international river basin organizations; 
(t) establish or participate in the establishment of mechanisms 
for the prevention, management and resolution of disputes 
relating to trans-boundary waters; and 
(g) undertake any other activity in relation to trans-boundary 
beneficial to Mainland Tanzania. 
100. The Minister, in performing his functions in respect to trans-
boundary waters, shall cause to be collected and analysed all the relevant 
data and information including, inter alia:-
(a) the water balance for each trans-boundary water that • 
compares forecasted water demand with data and 
infqnnation regarding water availability; 
408 
---·-----------------------


--- PAGE 58 ---

j 
No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(b) the volume of water abstracted and beneficially used within 
Mainland Tanzania and other riparian states from each trans:-.· 
boundary waters; 
(c) the nature of the beneficial uses within Mainland Tanzania 
supported by each trans-boundary waters, including the 
economic value of the uses; 
(d) the number of persons within Mainland Tanzania who rely 
upon each trans-boundary waters for domestic, agricultural, 
commercial or industrial purposes; 
(e) the relevant date or dates upon which the abstraction of 
water from each trans-boundary waters for beneficial use 
within Tanzania commenced; 
(t) the availability and reliability ofalternative sources of water 
to support existing beneficial uses within Mainland Tamania 
in the event abstractions from a 1:rans-boundary waters are 
curtailed; 
· 
(g) anticipated increases in demand for water from each trans-
boundary waters reasonably expected to occur within 
Mainland Tanzania in the foreseeable future; 
(h) the volume and composition of waste discharged from within 
Mainland Tanzania into each trans-boundary waters; 
(i) the relevant date or dates upon which the discharge·into 
each trans-boundary waters commenced; 
(j) the environmental integrity of trans-boundary waters and 
likely environmental threats including water pollution in the 
foreseeable future; and 
(k) the availability and reliability of alternative means of waste 
disposal within Mainland Tanzania in the event discharges 
into trans-boundary waters are curtailed. 
· 
PART XIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS 
101. Any person who assaults, threatens, resists, obstructs, hinders, 
delays or allows any person so to do to an authorised officer or person in 
the performance of his powers, functions or duties under this Act, commits 
an offence, and on conviction, shall be liable to a fine of not less than five 
hundred thousand shillings and not more than ten million shillings or 
imprisonment for a term of not Jess than one year but not more than two 
years or to both and shall in additjon, be liable to pay compensation 
sufficient to cover any damage which the authorised officer or. other_ 
person may have suffered as a result of the offence. 
409 
2009 
Offence 
to 
assault, 
threaten, 
resist, 
hinder or 
delay an. 
authorised 
ofticff ' ---


--- PAGE 59 ---

Miscella-
neous 
offences 
and 
penalties 
Water 
pollution 
Water Resources Management 
102.-( 1) Any person who in order to procure the grant of a Permit 
under this Act wilfully makes any statement knowing the same to be 
false in any material particular or not having reason to believe the same 
to be true commits an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine 
of not less than five hundred thousand shillings and not more than five 
million shillings or to imprisonment for a term not less than one and not 
more than two years or to both. 
(2) Any person who constructs or extends any works contrary to this 
Act or fails, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a requirement 
• 
made under Sections 48 and 66 or wilfully obstructs, damages or destroys 
any works or destroys, defaces or moves any level mark, beacon or 
other structure or appliance or obstructs, molests or hinders any authorized 
officer in the lawful exercise of his powers or duties under this Act, 
commits an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine of not 
less than five hundred thousand shillings and not more than one million 
shillings or to imprisonment for a term of not less than three months and 
not more one year, or to both, in the case of a second or subsequent 
conviction, _to a fine of not less than one million shillings or to imprisonment 
for a term not exceeding three years, or to both and in every case where 
the offence is a continuing one, to an additional fine of not less than fifty 
thousand shillings in respect of every day during which the offence 
continues. 
(3) Any person who, on being required to give information under any 
provision of this Act, or under any regulation made under this Act refuses 
without reasonable excuse to give such information or gives information 
knowing the same to be false, or having reason to believe the same not to 
be true, commits an offence and shall be liable upon conviction to a fine 
not exceeding five hundred thousand shillings or to imprisonment not 
exceeding two years or to both. 
103. Any person who pollutes the water in any river, stream or water 
course or in any body of surface water to such extent as to be likely to 
cause injury directly or indirectly to public health, to livestock or fish, to 
crops, orchards or gardens which are irrigated by such water or to any 
products in the processing of which such water is used commits an 
offence and shifll be liable on conviction to a fine of not less than one 
million shillings and not more than ten million shillings or to imprisonment 
for a term of not less than six months but not more than two years or to 
both and in case of subsequent conviction, to a fine not exceeding five 
410 


--- PAGE 60 ---

• 
No. 11 
Water Resources .A,fanagement 
million shillings or to imprisonment for a term not ex(.;eeding two years or 
to both and in case of continuation of the offence, to an additional fine 
not exceeding fifty thousand shillings in respect of every day during which 
the offence continues. 
104.-( 1) Where the Basin Water Board is satisfied that evidence is 
available that may reasonably support the bringing of charges against a 
person for an offence with a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand 
under this Act, and if that person admits in writm~~ to the offence, the 
Basin Water officer may compound the offence by accepting from that 
person-
(a) a sum of money as fine specified for the offence, together 
with all reasonable expenses the Basin Water Board may 
have incurred in the inspechon, taking and analysis of samples 
and measurements in connection with the offence; and 
(b) payment of all fees and charges which may have been due 
if the action had been authorized under this Act. 
(2) The compounding of an offence by any party under this section 
shall be a bar to any further criminal proceedings in respect of the offence. 
105.-( 1) Where any person is convicted of an offence under this 
Act and another person has suffered harm or loss as a result of the act or 
omission constituting the offence, or damage has been caused to a water 
source or works, the court may, in the same proceedings-
( a) at the written request of the person who suffered the harm 
ofloss; 
(b) at the written request of the Minister or a water management 
institution in respect of the damage caused to a water source 
or works; or 
. 
( c) in the presence of the convicted person, enquire without 
· pleadings into the harm, loss or damage and determine the 
extent thereof. 
(2) After making a determination in terms of subsection (I), the Court 
may-
(a) award damages for harm or loss suffered by the person 
referred to in subsection ( 1) against the accused; 
(b) order the accused to pay for the cost of any remedial measures 
implemented or to be implemented; and 
411 
1009 
Com-
pounding 
of 
offences 
Compe-
nsation 
for 
harm, loss 
ordamage 
suffered 


--- PAGE 61 ---

No. 11 
Appeals' 
regula~ 
tions 
• 
Water Resources Managerrzeiit · .· · 
2009 
( c) order the remedial measures tp be µnplemeil.ted, be undertaken 
either by the accuse? or the rel,eyant water management 
institution. 
PARTXfV 
APPEALS' 
. 
., 
:. 
106.-{l) The Minister may, by J::egulJtions published in the Gazette, . 
prescribe the procedure of making and hearing appeals arising from 
decisions of the Basin Water Boards and may, for that purpose, establish 
an Appeals Committee or committees to be'.'imowri as the "appellate 
authority" and provide for the exercise ofthe powers and the regulation 
of the procedure, of the Appeals ,C_ommittee or con:imittees, as the case 
may be. 
· 
by-
(2) Any person may appeal to the appellate,~uthority who is aggrieved 
.. 
. :·1. \, 
' 
.~-~ 
J 
(a) the refusal of a Basin,Watet•Boa~to~g:i:ant or renew any 
Permit under this Act, : 
(b) the determination, ditninution, t;nodification, suspension of 
such Permit or by the duration, for which the Permit was 
granted; 
· 
( c) the grant of or refusal to grant any easement or by the 
conditions subject to which any easement is created; 
(d) .any requirement that ariy work .is to be constructed, 
repaired, added to, altered, demolished or'destroyed, or that 
the use 9f any works be changed; 
( e) a direction regarding the protection qr disposal of groundwater; 
(f) a refusal of a Basin Water_ Board to approve and register the 
Constitution of a Water Users' Association; 
(g) a direction of the Basin Water aoatd issqed under Section 
,' 
,, 
' 
·, 
. 
1• 
83; 
; i 
I 
(h) any conditions imposed by the -lJa_sin Water Board when 
granting or renewing any permit under this Act; and 
(i) any such matters as the ·Minister'trJay subject to this Act, 
prescribe in the regulations. 
· 
(3) The decision of the appellate a1,1thority in the matter shall be 
' 
•. 
◊ 
• 
' 
412.'. 
,. 
! 
... 
__:._,_L _ __:_-~~~ 


--- PAGE 62 ---

No. 11 
. · Water Resources Management 
final, except that anyper~on submitting an appeal t~ the appellate authority 
may appeal against the decision.of the appellate authority to the Resident 
Magistrates' Court or a•District Court-
• 
◄ 
<; 
• 
(a) on a question oflaw; or, , 
., 
•· 
I 
(b) on th~ ·~un• of -any con:11'ensation or costs awarded. 
( 4) Notwithstanding t~e provisions of subsection (1 ), no person may 
appeal against the grant ;or renewal of a permit or the grant of any 
easement, who did. not: make• obj ectfon to such grant or renewal to the 
Basin Water Board'in accordance wtth the procedures prescribed by the 
Minister. 
PART.XV 
MtSCELLA~EOUS PROVISIONS 
107.-(1) Compensation_shaU hot be payable under any section of 
this Act unless a written claim has been lodged with the responsible 
Basin Water Board within one year of either the claimant learning of the 
action giving rise to the claim, or the completion of any works in respect 
of which compensation is s,ought, whichever is the later. 
(2) A claim for compensation shall contain the following particulars-
(a) the claimant's-name and address; 
(b) a description of the land in respect of which the claim is 
made;: · 
.. 
.· ... 
( C) a statemeht' of the claima~t's interest in the land; 
(d) the natureJnd extert.t oqhe interest of any other person in 
the lan.d; • ' ·, 
; ; · ." 
'. -
(e) the damage'alleged to have been caused to the land or loss of 
economic benefit; 
(f) the particulars of any damage; and 
(g) the total amount of claim:. 
(3) Upon considerati~n of the application for compensation the Basin 
Water Board, may award compensation in the form of-
(a) payment of money; 
2009 
Compe-
nsation 
(b) the.remission of rates, charges or fees payable to the Basin 
Cap. 331 
Water Board; 
( c) the diminution of any outstanding debt arising out of this Act 
or the Water Utilization(Control and Regulation) Act, and 
413 


--- PAGE 63 ---

No. 11 
Service of 
notice 
• 
Civil 
liability 
not to be 
affe.:ted 
Indemnity 
and 
liability 
Cap Nos. 
16 and 76 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
( d) any other type of award which the Basin Water Board may 
consider appropriat(j. 
( 4) The Basin Water Board shall within three months notify the claimant 
of its decision on a claim made under subsection (3) and any person 
aggrieved by the decision of the Basin Water Board may appeal in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 106. 
(5) Any compensation due under this section which remains unpaid may 
be recovered in a civil debt. 
108. A notice under this Act shall be deemed to have been served 
on, or given to, any person if-
(a) served on him personally, and the recipient has signed for the 
receipt of the notice; 
(b) left for him at his last known address; or 
( c) sent by registered post addressed to his last known address. 
109. Subject to any express provisions in this Act, nothing contained 
in this Act shall affect the civil liability of any person for any damage 
resulting from the-
( a) construction, alteration or destruction of any works or the 
failure to maintain the same in proper.repair; 
(b) obstruction, storage or diversion of any water; and 
( c) discharge of any effluent authorized by the Basin Water 
Board by a permit to discharge. 
110.-{1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 284A of the 
Penal Code , the Public Officers (Recovery of Debts) Act and the 
relevant provisions of this Act, no member of th~ Basin Water Board or 
a Catchment or Sub-catchment Water Committee, or an officer of these 
Boards and Committees or any authorized officer shall be personally 
liable for any act or default which is done or omitted to be done in good 
faith in the exercise or purported exercise of the powers conferred by 
this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) a member of 
the Basin Water Board or a Catchment or Sub-'catchment Water 
Committee, or an officer of the Board and Committee or any authorized 
officer may be held liable for acts done contrary to this Act or for omission 
414 


--- PAGE 64 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
in implementing the provisions of this Act. 
111.-(1) The Minister may make regulations prescribing anything 
which may be prescribed under this Act 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection ( 1 ), the regulations 
may-
(a) prescribe the registers and records to be kept and the manner 
in which they are to be kept; 
(b) provide for the forms to be used and the fees to be paid in 
respect of any matter required or pem1itted to be done under 
this Act; 
( c) provide for the advertisement of applications for the use of 
water and for the giving of notice to interested persons; 
(d) provide for and regulate the making of objections to a Basin 
Water Board and the time within wh1ch such objections shall 
be made; 
( e) prescribe the quorum of~ and the procedure to be adopted by 
a Basin Water Board, the manner in which and the extent to 
which it shall receive evidence and hear arguments by 
objectors and others, and the manner in which they shall 
record their findings; 
( f) provide for the transfer, to the land register under the Land 
Registration or to a register maintained under the Registration 
of Documents Act particulars of easements which were. 
registered in the Water Right record maintained under the 
Water Utilization (Control and Regulation) Act, and which 
subsist on the date upon which this Act comes into operation; 
(g) provide for regulating the procedure for making applications 
for the grant of Permits, the making of objections to any 
such application, the making of appeals against refused 
applications or conditions imposed on any Permits granted, 
and any other matters related to the grant of any Permit 
under this Act; 
(h) provide for regulating the procedure for the preparation of 
water resources management plans and the involvement of 
persons with a clear interest in integrated water resources 
therein; 
( i) provide for the procedure for trading of water permits, application 
of economic incentives and pricing of water use; or 
. 
(j) provide for the implementation of any provision of this Act. 
415 
2009 
Power to 
make 
regulations 
Caps. 
334, 117 
and 281 
Cap. 
Nos. 
334, JI 7 
and 281 


--- PAGE 65 ---

Repeal 
and 
Savings 
Provi~ · 
sion$ 
. Cap.331 
Transfer 
of respon-
sibilities 
to boards 
andcom-
mittees 
Water Resources Management 
PART XVI 
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
2009 
112.-{l) The.Water Utilization (Control and Regulation) Act is herehy 
repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Water Utilization (Control and 
R~gulation) Act-
(a) all ~roceedings commenced under the repealed Act and 
pending before any court immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall be continued and concluded 
as if this Act had not been enacted; 
(b) proceedings which are pending before any court otherwise 
than an appeal from a decision of another court ¥1d such 
proceedings are for assessment of compensation, the 
compensation shall, if the same has not been assessed, he 
assessed in accordance with the provisions of this Act and 
no compensation shall in any proceedings be awarded in any 
case in which no compensation may otherwise be awarded 
under this Act; 
• 
(c) all orders, notices, directions, appointments and other acts 
and things lawfully made, issued or done under any of the 
provisions of the repealed Act and made, issued or done 
before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to 
have been made, issued or done under the corresponding 
provisiori of this Act, and shall continue to have effect 
accordingly; and 
( d) any decree or order of the court passed or made before the 
commencement of this Act may be enforced as if this Act 
had not been enacted. 
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection ( c) of this section 
all entries in the Water Register made pursuant to the provisions of the 
repealed Act shall remain in force until such time as they may be cancelled 
pursuant to the provisions of this Act. 
113. As soon as reasonably practicable after the commencement of 
this Act, and upon public consultation, the •Minister shall publish by notice 
in the. Gazette a plan for the transfer of the management of water 
resources to the Basin Water Boards and Catchment and Sub-catchment 
Water Committees established under this Act. 
416 
------


--- PAGE 66 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(2) The plan shall-
(a) provide details of the institutional, organisational and financial 
arrangements, and capacity building and other measures to 
ensure an orderly transfer of water resources management 
responsibilities; 
(b) prescribe appropriate arrangements for transferring to the 
Basin Water Boards ownership of plant, equipment or other 
assets used by the government in connection with water 
resources management; and 
(c) specify measures to give effect to the plan within a specified 
time. 
114.-(l) Until the transfer of responsibilities from Government to 
the Basin Water Boards, Catchment and Sub-catchment Water 
Committees by means of the measures specified in the plan under Section 
113 have come into effect, the functions, responsibilities and powers of 
the Basin Water or Catchment or Sub-catchment Water Committee 
established under this Act shall be exercised by the following persons 
respectively-
(a) in respect of the Basin Water Boards, by the Basin Water 
Officers in the Ministry responsible for water; and 
(b) in respect of Catchment or Sub-catchment Water Committees, 
by the Catchment Water Officers. 
(2) Where the Basin Water Board or Catchment Sub-catchment 
Water Committee has been constituted in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act but has no staff, the Minister may direct that necessary staff 
be seconded to the Basin Water Board, Catchment or· Sub-catchment 
Water Committee such staff shall be employed by the Basin Water Board, 
Catchment or Sub-catchment Water Committee, as the case may be. 
FIRST SCHEDULE 
(Made under section 20(3) 
MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEDURE OF THE NATIONAL WATER BOARD 
1.-( I) The National Water Board shall consist of the Chairman and other ten 
members to be appointed by the Minister from the following sectors -
(i) agriculture; 
417 
2009 
Transi-
tional 
provi-
sions 
Membership 
of the 
National 
Water Board 


--- PAGE 67 ---

No. 11 
Tennofoffice 
and 
eligibility 
of appoin-
tment of 
merrbers 
Water Resources Management 
(ii)energy; 
(iii) industry; 
(iv) forestry; 
(v) environment; 
(vi) livestock; 
(vii) wildlife; 
(viii) lands; 
(ix) mining; 
(x) irrigation; 
(xi) fisheries; and 
(xii) infrastructure; 
(c) one representative from local government administration. 
(d) three representatives from Basin Water Boards. 
(e) one representatives of the private sector. 
(f) one representative from Non-Government Organisations 
2009 
(2) At'least one third of the members of the National Water Board shall be women. 
(3) The Director of Water Resources shall be a member of the Board and the 
Secretary thereto. 
(4) The Minister shall, by regulations published in the Gazette, prescribe the 
procedures for the nomination of the representatives set out in subsection (I). · 
2.-(1) Every member shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible 
for re-appointment unless-
(a) in the case ofa member appointed in his own name, until such time as the 
appointing authority revokes his appointment and appoints another person 
in his place; 
(b) in the case of a member who is appointed by virtue of his holding some 
other office, until such time as he ceases to hold that other office; and 
(c) until a member resigns or has been removed by the Minister in accordance 
with subsection (4) of this section. 
(2) Where any member is, by reason ofillness, infirmity or absence from Mainland 
Tanzania, unable to attend any meeting of the National Water Board the appointing 
authority may appoint a temporary member in his place and the temporary member 
sh al I cease to hold office on the resumption of office of the substantive member. 
(3) The National Water board may co-opt any person for a specified meeting for 
the performance of any of its functions, but such a person shall have the right to vote. 
(4) The Minister may only remove a member from the National Water Board ifhe 
is reasonably satisfied that such member-
(a) has been absent from Formal Meetings of the National Water Board for a 
period of more than three consecutive meeting without due cause and 
without permission from the Chairman; 
(b) has been declared bankrupt, or has committed, or is reasonably suspected 
of committing financial irregularities, or has abused his position to his 
financial or other advantage; 
418 


--- PAGE 68 ---

,,.. 
No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(c) ceased to be a member or employee of the institution he is representing; 
(d) incompetent and unwilling to carry out the functions as a member of the 
National Water Board; and 
(e) is of unsound mind. 
3.-(1) The National Water Board shall elect one of its members to be the 
Vice-Chairman who shall, subject to his continuing to be a member, hold the office of 
Vice-Chairman for a term of three years from the date of his election and shall be eligible 
for re-election. 
(2) The National Water Board shall ordinarily meet for the transaction of its 
business four times a year and may hold two extra ordinary meeting to be convened by 
the Secretary. 
(3) The business of the National Water Board shall be conducted in such manner as 
the Minister may, by order published in the Gazette, prescribe; but where no procedure, 
is prescribed the National Water Board shall conduct its business in such manner as it 
shall determifle. 
4. The Minister may dissolve the National Water Board. 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Made under section 22(4)) 
MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEDURE OF BASIN WATER BOARDS 
1.-(1) The membership of the Basin Water Board shall be composed of the following: 
(a) Chairman, to be appointed by the Minister responsible for water; 
(b) one representative from private sector water users in the basin from-
( i) 
industries; or 
(ii) mmmg; or 
(iii) agriculture; or 
(iv) power, 
(c) 
up to three representatives from the Catchment Water Committees; 
(d) 
up to two representatives from key water related sectors which are of 
importance in the Basin, which may include-
(i) 
agriculture, 
(ii) energy, 
(iii) minerals, 
(iv) trade and industry, 
(v) 
forestry, 
419 
2009 
Proceedings 
of the 
National 
Water 
Board 
Minister 
may 
dissolve 
board 
Membership 
of the 
Basin Water 
Boards 


--- PAGE 69 ---

No. 11 
Proceed111g, 
ofu B..isin 
Water 
Board 
1'Vater Resources Management 
(vi) environment, 
(vii) natural resources, 
(viii) lands, 
(ix) 
livestock; 
{ x) 
fisheries; 
( \ 1 J in frastrueturc. 
(eJ 
one representative from local government authorities; 
2009 
(f) 
one representati,e from water supply and sanitation authorities; and 
(g) 
one representative from the Ministry responsible for water; 
(2) Members of the Boards under subparagraphy (I) shall be appointed by the 
Minister from three names of candidates as nominated or elected by the relevant sector 
or organi?ation. 
(3) The Basin Water Officer shall be the Secretary to the Board. 
(4) At least one third of members of the Basin Water Board shall be women. 
(5) The members of the Bas111 Water Board shall be involved in and have adequate 
knowledge and experience in water resources affairs in the area of the respective Basin 
Water Board. 
(6) The :\1inister shall. by regulations published in the Gazette, prescribe the 
procedures for the nomination of the representatives in sifuparagraph (I). 
2.-( I) Every member sh al I hold office for .i term of three years and shall be eligible 
for re-appo111tmcnt unlcss-
(a) in the case ofa member appointed in his own name, until such time as the 
appointing authority revokes his appointment and appoints another person 
in his place; 
(bl in the case ofa member who is gppointed by virtue of his holding some 
other office, unti I such time as he ceases to hold that other office; and 
( c) until a member resigns or has been removed by the Minister in accordance 
with subparagraph (4) of this section. 
(2) Where any member is, by reason of illness, infirmity or absence from Mainland 
Tanzania, unable to attend any meeting of the Basin Water Board the appointing authority 
may appoint a temporary member in his place and the temporary member shall cease to 
hold office on the resumption ofoffice of the substantive member. 
(3) The Basin Water board may co-opt any additional members for a specified 
meeting for the performance of any of its functions, but no co-opted member shall have 
the right to vote. 
(4) The Minister may only remove a member from the Basin Water Board ifhe is 
reasonably satisfied that such member-
(a) has been absent from Formal Meetings of the Basin Water Board for a 
period of more than three consecutive meeting without due cause and 
without permission from the Chairman; 
420 
-------~-


--- PAGE 70 ---

"' 
No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
(b) has been declared bankrupt, or has committed, or is reasonably suspected 
of committing financial irregularities, or has abused his position to his 
financial or other advantage; 
(c) ceased to be a member or employee of the institution he is representing; 
(d) incompetent and unwilling to carry out the functions as a member of 
the Basin Water Board; and 
(e) is of unsound mind. 
3.-(1) The Basin Water Board shall elect one of its members to be the 
Vice-Chairman who shall, subject to his continuing to be a member, hold the office of 
Vice-Chairman for a term of three years from the date of his election and shall be eligible 
for re-election. 
(2) The Basin Water Board shall ordinarily meet for the transaction of its business 
four times·a year and may hold two extra ordinary meetings. 
(3) The business of the Basin Water Board shall be conducted in such manner as the 
Minister may, by order published in the Gazette, prescribe; but where no procedure, is 
prescribed the Basin Water Board shall conduct its business in such manner as it shall 
determine. 
4. The Members of the Board shall be paid such allowance as the Minister may 
detem1ine. 
THIRD SCHEDULE 
(Made 1111der section 29( 3)(b)) 
MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEDURE OF CAT,CHMENT AND 
SUB-CATCHMENT WATER COMMITTEES 
1.-( I) The Catchment Water Committee shall be composed of not less than three 
and not more than five members which shall comprise the following-
( a) a Chairman 'to be appointed by the Basin Water Board; 
(b) one representative from major private sector water users in the catchment 
area, for example industries, mining, agriculture, power producers; 
(c) up to two representative from the Water Users Associations in the catchment 
area; 
(d)one representative from the local government authorities in the catchment 
area; 
(2) All members under items (a), (b) and (c) shall be appointed by the Board. 
(3) At least one-third of the members of the Catchment Water Commiitee shall be 
women. 
421 
2009 
Prol'cedings 
ofu Ba:,in 
Waler 
Board 
Remu11cn.J.·· 
tion 
of members 
Member-
ship of 
Catchment 
Water 
Committees 


--- PAGE 71 ---

No. 11 
Tennof 
otliceand 
eligibility 
of 
appointment 
ofmembers 
Proceedings 
and business 
of the 
Catchment 
\l'ater 
lo111111ittee 
Applicati011 
to Sub-
Catchment 
Water 
co111mittees 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(4) The members of the Catchment Water Committee shall be involved in and have 
adequate knowledge and experience in water resources affairs in the catchment area. 
(5) The Catchment Water Officer shall the ex-officio Secretary of the Catchment 
Committee; 
(6) The Minister shall, by regulations published in the Gazette, prescribe the 
procedures for the nomination of the representatives in subparagraph (I). 
2.-( I) Every member shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible 
for re-appointment unless-
(a) in the case of a member appointed in his own name, until such time as the 
appointing authority revokes his appointment and appoints another person 
in his place; 
(b) in the case ofa member who is appointed by virtue of his holding some 
other office, until such time as he ceases to hold that other office; and 
(c) until a member resigns or has been removed by the Minister in accordance 
with subsection (4) of this section. 
(2) Where any member is, by reason of illness, infirmity or absence from Mainland 
Tanzania, unable to attend any meeting of the Catchment Water Committee the appointing 
authority may appoint a temporary member in his place and the temporary member 
shall cease to hold office on the resumption of office of the substantive member. 
(3) The Catchment Water Committee may co-opt any additional members for a 
specified meeting for the performance of any of its functions, but no co-opted member 
shall have the right to vote. 
( 4) The Minister may only remove a member from the Catchment Water Committee 
if he is reasonably satisfied that such member-
( a) has been absent from Formal Meetings of the Catchment Water Committee 
for a period of more than three consecutive meeting without due cause and 
without permission from the Chairman; 
(b) has been declared bankrupt, or has committed, or is reasonably suspected 
of committing financial irregularities, or has abused his position to his 
financial or other advantage: 
(c) ceased to be a member or employee of the institution he is representing: 
(d) incompetent and unwilling to carry out the functions as a member of the 
Catchment Water Committee; and 
(e) is of unsound mind. 
3. The proceedings and business of the Catchment Water Committee shall be 
conducted in such manner as the Basin Water Board may determine. 
4. Where a Sub-catchment Water Committee is established by a Basin Water Board, 
Sections I, 2 and 3 of this Schedule shall apply 111utatis 111uta11dis to such Sub-catchment 
Water Committees. 
422 


--- PAGE 72 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources A1anagement 
FOURTH SCHEDULE 
(Made under section 81 (I)) 
CONSTJTUTION OF A WATER USERS ASSOCIATION 
I. The Constitution of the Water Users Association. 
There is hereby formed the Water Users Association (hereinafter referred to as the 
"Association". 
The Association, including its Management Committee, shall have the status of a 
legal person and in that capacity it shall be capable of suing and being sued. 
The liability of any venture of the Association shall be limited. 
The members of the Association shall be villagers, institutions, companies, 
committees and authorities or any person natural or legal, as may be users of water from 
sources located within the area of responsibility of the Association. 
2. The objects of the Association shall be to:- (delete those not applicable) 
(a) manage, distribute and conserve water from a source used jointly by the 
members of the Association; 
(b) to construct, rehabilitate operate and maintain any works for the purposes 
of management of the water resource in its area of responsibility: 
(c) arbitrate in the resolution of conflicts between holders ofWater Use Permits 
with its area of responsibility; 
(d) agree by consensus of its members equitable reductions in the quantities of 
water abstracted from the source under its responsibility in times of drought 
or other restrictions on resource availability; 
(e) acquire and operate any Water Use Permit under the provisions of the 
Water Resources Management Act, 2009; 
(f) do such other things as may be considered necessary by a majority of its 
members in order to manage the water resources in its area in a fair and 
equitable manner in accordance with the intent and provisions of the Water 
Resources Management Act, 2009. 
3. The area of responsibility of the Association shall be, as shown on the attached 
map. 
4.-{ I) An Annual General Meeting shall be held once each year. An Extra-ordinary 
General Meeting of the Association may be called by five percentum of members giving 
two weeks_ notice to the Secretary in writing. 
(2) One third of the full number of members containing no fewer than four from 
each ofthe upper and the lower area of the catchment or from each village present shall 
constitute a quorum. 
423 
2009 


--- PAGE 73 ---

No. 11 
Water Resources Management 
2009 
(3) Voting can be exercised by a member or proxy in favour of another member 
provided the proxy form is in the hands of the Secretary prior to the meeting. 
(4) A majority of votes at the Annual General Meeting shall decide the principles 
governing conservation, maintenance of works in the river in question and shall decide the 
assessments to be levied thereof and for expenses of the Association. 
5. A Management Committee shall be elected at the Annual General Meeting of the 
Entity and shall consist of six elected members. 
(2) The Committee so elected may sue and be sued in the name of the Association 
for moneys or otherwise, and shall have the powers to bind the Entity by contract. 
(3) The Committee shall collect and receive any moneys due to the Association and 
pay moneys owing to the Association from time to time and open and maintain a bank 
account through its authorised officers and submit such annual audited accounts to the 
Association at the Annual General Meeting. 
(4) The Management Committee shall meet not less than once in each quarter of the 
year and al I elected members must be present. 
(5) The Management Committee shall meet once in each quarter of the year and the 
quorum of the Commttee shall be two thirds of all members. 
(6) The Management Committee shall also decide the extent, manner and time of 
levying the assessments laid down by the Annual General Meeting of the Association. 
(7) The Management Committee shall appoint and employ such employees as may 
be necessary to fulfil the purposes of the Association. 
6. Any member of the Association making default in payment of any fees or moneys 
so assessed and after receiving notice from the Committee shall, if such amount be correct, 
be personally liable to the Association. 
7. The Entity shall not be liable for any indebtedness other then that contracted 
by its Committee duly authorised in writing. 
8. Each member hereby undertakes with other members and each of them as 
follows: 
(a) to pay entrance fees as being elected to the Association, the amount set by 
General Meeting; 
(b) to pay all assessments levied against him by the Association. 
( c) that he will not draw from the source more water than the amount specified 
, save as authorised by the Committee and wi II observe rules or regulations 
made by the Association. 
Passed in the National Assembly on the 28th April, 2009. 
424 
DR. THOMAS D. KASHILILAH, 
Clerk of the National Assemb~y 
