****
[NO TEXT PROVIDED FOR TRANSLATION]

****
Water Code of Turkmenistan (as amended and supplemented as of June 3, 2023)

**Section I. General Provisions**
**Chapter I. Basic Provisions**
Article 1. Key Concepts Used in this Code
Article 2. Water Legislation of Turkmenistan
Article 3. Goals and Objectives of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan
Article 4. Basic Principles of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan
Article 5. Right of Ownership of the Water Fund of Turkmenistan
Article 6. Right of Ownership of Hydraulic Structures
Article 7. Water Fund of Turkmenistan
Article 8. Subjects of Water Relations
Article 9. Lands of the Water Fund

**Section II. State Management and State Control in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
**Chapter II. State Management in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Article 10. State Bodies Exercising Management in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection
Article 11. Competence of the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan
Article 12. Competence of the Authorized Body
Article 13. Competence of the Authorized Executive Body in the Sphere of Environmental Protection
Article 14. Competence of the Authorized Executive Body in the Sphere of Geology
Article 15. Territorial and Basin State Water Management Organizations
Article 16. Competence of Authorized State Bodies in the Sphere of Potable Water Use and Potable Water Supply
Article 17. Competence of Local Executive Authorities
Article 18. Competence of Local Self-Government Bodies
Article 19. Participation of Citizens and Public Associations in the Implementation of Measures in the Sphere of Water Management

**Chapter III. State Control in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Article 20. Functions of State Control in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection
Article 21. Bodies Exercising State Control over Water Resources

**Section III. State Planning in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection. State Water Accounting, State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan, and State Monitoring of Water Bodies**
**Chapter IV. State Planning in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Article 22. Objectives of State Planning in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection
Article 23. Water Management Balances
Article 24. Schemes for the Integrated Use and Protection of Water

**Chapter V. State Water Accounting, State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan, and State Monitoring of Water Bodies**
Article 25. Objectives of State Water Accounting
Article 26. State Accounting of Surface Waters
Article 27. State Accounting of Groundwater
Article 28. State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan
Article 29. State Monitoring of Water Bodies

**Section IV. Water Use**
**Chapter VI. Right to Use Water Bodies. Types of Water Use**
Article 30. Right to Use Water Bodies
Article 31. Granting of Water Bodies for Use
Article 32. Purposes for Granting Water Bodies for Use
Article 33. Types of Water Use
Article 34. General Water Use
Article 35. Special Water Use
Article 36. Separate Water Use
Article 37. Joint Water Use
Article 38. Primary and Secondary Water Use
Article 39. Terms of Use for Water Bodies

**Chapter VII. Rights and Obligations of Water Users**
Article 40. Rights of Water Users
Article 41. Obligations of Water Users
Article 42. Guarantees for Securing the Rights of Water Users
Article 43. Restriction of the Rights of Water Users

**Chapter VIII. Grounds and Procedure for Terminating the Right of Water Use**
Article 44. Termination of the Right of Water Use
Article 45. Grounds and Procedure for Terminating the Right of Special Water Use
Article 46. Withdrawal of Water Bodies from Separate Use

**Chapter IX. Use of Water Bodies for Potable and Domestic Water Supply**
Article 47. Use of Water Bodies for Potable and Domestic Water Supply
Article 48. Centralized Water Supply for the Population
Article 49. Non-Centralized Water Supply for the Population

**Chapter X. Use of Water Bodies for Curative, Health, and Recreational Purposes**
Article 50. Use of Water Bodies for Curative and Health Purposes
Article 51. Use of Water Bodies for Recreational Purposes

**Chapter XI. Use of Water Bodies for Agricultural Needs**
Article 52. Use of Water Bodies for Agricultural Needs
Article 53. Planning of Water Use in Agriculture
Article 54. Use of Wastewater and Drainage Water for Irrigation
Article 55. Provision of Water for Service Land Allotments, Personal Subsidiary Plots, and Garden Plots
Article 56. Agricultural Use of Water Sources with Temporary Watercourses
Article 57. Prohibition of Unauthorized Regulation of Hydraulic Structures
Article 58. Conditions for Watering and Bathing Animals, Driving Livestock, and Passage of Vehicles Across Canals and Other Hydraulic Structures
Article 59. Inter-farm and Intra-farm Hydraulic Structures
Article 60. Operation of Hydro-ameliorative Systems
Article 61. Operation of Hydraulic Structures Intended for Water Transport and Disposal

**Chapter XII. Use of Water Bodies for Industrial and Energy Purposes**
Article 62. Procedure for Using Water Bodies for Industrial and Energy Purposes
Article 63. Restriction or Prohibition of the Use of Potable Water Bodies for Industrial and Production Needs
Article 64. Use of Groundwater for Technical Water Supply and Other Production Needs
Article 65. Use of Water Bodies for Energy Needs

**Chapter XIII. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Fisheries, Hunting, and Forestry. Use of Water Bodies Located in Specially Protected Natural Areas**
Article 66. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Fisheries
Article 67. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Hunting Management
Article 68. Preferential Rights of Hunting Enterprises to Use Water Bodies
Article 69. Use of Water Bodies Located in Specially Protected Natural Areas
Article 70. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Forestry and during Landscaping Works

**Chapter XIV. Use of Water Bodies for Transport and Firefighting Needs**
Article 71. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Water Transport
Article 72. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Air Transport
Article 73. Use of Water Bodies for Firefighting Needs

**Chapter XV. Use of Water Bodies for the Discharge of Wastewater, Return Water, and Drainage Water**
Article 74. General Requirements and Conditions for Using Water Bodies for the Discharge of Wastewater, Return Water, and Drainage Water
Article 75. Conditions for the Discharge of Drainage Water into Water Bodies
Article 76. Conditions for the Discharge of Mine, Quarry, and Pit Water into Water Bodies
Article 77. Industrial Wastewater Accumulators and Technological Reservoirs
Article 78. Use of Underground Water Bodies for the Discharge of Wastewater
Article 79. Disposal of Wastewater in the Earth's Subsurface

**Chapter XVI. Operation of Reservoirs**
Article 80. Regime for Filling Reservoirs and Discharging Water from Reservoirs
Article 81. Procedure for the Operation of Reservoirs

**Chapter XVII. Use of Rivers**
Article 82. Classification of Rivers of Turkmenistan
Article 83. Specifics of River Use
Article 84. Set of Measures to Preserve the Water Content of Rivers and Protect Them from Pollution
Article 85. Regulation of River Flow, Creation of Artificial Water Bodies
Article 86. Use of Temporary Surface Runoff
Article 87. Regulation of Surface Water Runoff Using Temporary Hydraulic Structures
Article 88. Use of Transboundary Water Bodies

**Section V. Protection of Water Bodies and Prevention of the Adverse Effects of Water**
**Chapter XVIII. Protection of Water Bodies**
Article 89. General Requirements for the Protection of Water Bodies
Article 90. Protection of Water Bodies from Pollution and Contamination
Article 91. Protection of Water Bodies from Depletion

**Chapter XIX. Water Protection Zones and Coastal Water Protection Strips of Water Bodies**
Article 92. Water Protection Zones and Coastal Water Protection Strips of Water Bodies
Article 93. Right-of-Way Strips of Land
Article 94. Sanitary Protection Zones of Water Bodies

**Chapter XX. Warning, Prevention, and Elimination of the Consequences of the Adverse Effects of Water and Accidents on Water Bodies**
Article 95. Planning and Implementation of Measures to Warn, Prevent, and Eliminate the Consequences of the Adverse Effects of Water
Article 96. Commissions for the Prevention and Elimination of the Consequences of Natural Disasters Caused by the Adverse Effects of Water and Accidents on Water Bodies
Article 97. Zones of Ecological Emergency and Ecological Disaster

**Chapter XXI. Requirements for the Siting, Design, Construction, Reconstruction, and Commissioning of Enterprises, Structures, and Other Facilities Affecting the Condition of Water**
Article 98. Conditions for the Siting, Design, Construction, Reconstruction, and Commissioning of Facilities Affecting the Condition of Water
Article 99. Conditions for Prohibiting the Commissioning of Enterprises and Other Facilities Affecting the Condition of Water
Article 100. Requirements for Performing Work on Water Bodies

**Section VI. Regulation and Standardization in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
**Chapter XXII. Regulation and Standardization in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Article 101. Unified System of Regulation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection
Article 102. Water Use Limits
Article 103. Standards for the Ecological Safety of Water Use
Article 104. Ecological Standards for the Water Quality of Water Bodies
Article 105. Standards for the Maximum Permissible Discharge of Pollutants into Water Bodies
Article 106. Sectoral Technological Standards for the Generation of Pollutants Discharged into Water Bodies
Article 107. Technological Standards for Water Use
Article 108. Prohibition on Discharging into Water Bodies Pollutants for which Standards in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection Have Not Been Established
Article 109. Standardization and Certification in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection

**Section VII. Economic Mechanism for Ensuring the Rational Use and Protection of Water**
**Chapter XXIII. Economic Methods of Regulating Water Use**
Article 110. Types of Economic Regulation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection
Article 111. Paid Use of Water Resources and Tariffs

**Section VIII. Resolution of Disputes in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection. Liability for Violation of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan. International Cooperation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
**Chapter XXIV. Resolution of Disputes in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Article 112. Water Disputes
Article 113. Bodies Resolving Water Disputes
Article 114. Procedure for Considering Water Disputes
Article 115. Resolution of Property Disputes Related to Water Relations
Article 116. Return of Unlawfully Seized Water Bodies

**Chapter XXV. Liability for Violation of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan**
Article 117. Liability for Violation of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan
Article 118. Compensation for Damage Caused to Water Bodies and Hydraulic Structures as a Result of Violation of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan

**Chapter XXVI. International Cooperation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Article 119. International Cooperation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection
Article 120. Main Directions of International Cooperation in the Sphere of the Use and Protection of Transboundary Waters

This Code governs relations in the sphere of the sustainable and rational use of water to meet the water resource needs of legal entities and natural persons and is aimed at enhancing the value of water resources, ensuring the protection of waters from pollution, contamination, and depletion, preventing and eliminating the adverse effects of waters, and restoring and improving the condition of water bodies.

**Section I. GENERAL PROVISIONS**

**CHAPTER I. BASIC PROVISIONS**

**Article 1. Key Concepts Used in this Code**
1. The following key concepts are used in this Code:
1) **waters** – the aggregate of all water concentrated in water bodies;
2) **water body** – a concentration of water in artificial watercourses and conduits or in natural depressions on the earth's surface, or in the subsurface, having defined boundaries, volume, and characteristics of a hydrological regime or groundwater regime;
3) **water resources** – the reserves of surface and groundwaters of a given territory;
4) **watercourse** – a water body characterized by the movement of water in the direction of a slope within a depression on the earth's surface;
5) **water basin** – a surface water body in a depression on the earth's surface, characterized by slow water movement (flowing) or its complete absence (non-flowing);
6) **water area** – a water space within natural, artificial, or conventional boundaries;
7) **integrated (comprehensive) water resources management** – an approach that allows for the sustainable and balanced development and management of water resources, taking into account social, economic, and environmental interests, as well as the coordination of water resources management across various economic sectors;
8) **basin management principle** – the management of the water fund based on hydrographic features, implemented through the allocation of water resources within the basins of rivers, lakes, and other water bodies;
9) **hydrological regime** – the change over time in the levels, flow rates, and volumes of water in water bodies;
10) **water disposal** – a set of measures ensuring the removal of wastewater, rainwater, and drainage water;
11) **water use** – the use of water resources in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan to meet the needs of legal entities and natural persons;
12) **water user** – a legal entity or natural person who has been granted the right to use water resources in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan;
13) **water consumption** – the use of water resources to meet the needs of the population and sectors of the economy;
14) **water consumer** – a legal entity or natural person who receives water from a water user in the prescribed manner to meet their needs;
15) **state water management organizations** – territorial and basin state water management organizations carrying out activities in the sphere of water use and protection;
16) **water supplier** – territorial or basin state water management organizations that carry out water intake and transport for a water user;
17) **water supply services** – services that include the costs of maintaining in working condition and operating the inter-farm and intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network, hydraulic and other structures, as well as pumping units;
18) **hydraulic structures** – artificially created structures for the purpose of regulating the use and protection of water resources, water supply, water disposal, and eliminating the adverse effects of water;
19) **hydro-ameliorative system (network)** – a complex of technologically interconnected hydraulic structures, devices, and equipment intended for the irrigation, watering, and drainage of lands;
20) **irrigation network** – a part of a hydro-ameliorative system (network) consisting of permanent and temporary irrigation canals and pipelines that serve to supply water for the purpose of irrigating lands and distributing it among land users for watering agricultural crops and green (forest) plantations;
21) **collector-drainage network** – a part of a hydro-ameliorative network consisting of underground and surface canals and structures thereon, intended for the collection and removal of excess groundwater to water receivers (main collectors, depressions in the terrain);
22) **water intake structure** – a complex of structures and devices intended for the intake of water from water bodies;
23) **protection of water bodies** – a set of measures aimed at warning, preventing, and eliminating the pollution, contamination, and depletion of water bodies, and their preservation and restoration;
24) **pollution of water bodies** – the entry into a water body of pollutants, microorganisms, or heat that degrades the composition and properties of the water;
25) **contamination of water bodies** – the entry of foreign substances into surface water bodies that degrades the quality of the water;
26) **depletion of water bodies** – a reduction in the reserves of surface and groundwaters with a subsequent possible deterioration of their quality;
27) **adverse effects of water** – flooding, waterlogging, swamping of certain territories, destruction of water bodies or their parts, and other harmful effects on them;
28) **wastewater** – water formed as a result of human economic and other activities, atmospheric precipitation, as well as mine, quarry, and pit water;
29) **drainage water** – groundwater whose removal is carried out by hydraulic structures specially designed for this purpose, in order to prevent its adverse effects;
30) **return water** – surface and groundwaters that enter water bodies after their economic or domestic use;
31) **sanitary protection zone of water bodies** – a territory that includes the source of a potable water supply and waterworks facilities, consisting of three sanitary protection belts, in each of which a special regime for economic activity and protection of water from pollution, contamination, and depletion is established;
32) **transboundary water bodies (transboundary waters)** – water bodies that mark, cross the border between two or more foreign states, or along which the State Border runs;
33) **water protection zones** – territory adjacent to water bodies where zones with special conditions for its use are established in order to prevent the pollution, contamination, and depletion of water bodies, and to maintain their ecological stability and proper sanitary condition;
34) **coastal water protection strips** – territories within water protection zones where a regime of restricted economic activity is established;
35) **transboundary impact** – adverse consequences arising from a quantitative or qualitative change in transboundary waters caused by human activity, the physical source of which is located wholly or partly in the territory of a neighboring state or states;
36) **water user association** – a public association created for the purpose of jointly managing intra-farm hydro-ameliorative systems (networks) and maintaining them in working condition and operation;
37) **water user group** – users of water resources without the formation of a legal entity who, in the service area of a Daikhan association, water user association, or other water users, assume responsibility for maintaining in working condition and operating the irrigation and collector-drainage network that is part of the single intra-farm hydro-ameliorative system (network) of the Daikhan association, water user association, or other water users;
38) **planned water management measure** – ensuring the operational reliability of hydraulic structures at all stages of their construction and operation, and the preservation of fauna and flora, including measures to conserve bioresources;
39) **water management operational measure** – the effective operation of hydraulic structures or water management facilities throughout their standard service life in order to meet the functional requirements placed upon them, ensure their standard (serviceable) technical condition and a normal level of safety with the economical use of water, land, labor, and energy resources, and the mandatory implementation of measures to prevent the negative impact of the operation of these structures and facilities on the environment.
40) **separately located hydraulic structures** – engineering structures and devices that are not part of hydro-ameliorative systems and which provide for the regulation, lifting, supply, and distribution of water to consumers, water disposal, protection of soils from water erosion, and protection against mudflows and landslides.
2. Other concepts are defined in individual articles of this Code.

**Article 2. Water Legislation of Turkmenistan**
1. The water legislation of Turkmenistan is based on the Constitution of Turkmenistan and consists of this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan that regulate water relations.
2. Normative legal acts of Turkmenistan regulating issues of water use and protection shall be adopted on the basis of this Code and must not contradict its provisions.
3. Relations arising in the sphere of potable water use and potable water supply are regulated by this Code and the legislation of Turkmenistan on potable water.
4. Relations arising in the sphere of the use and protection of marine and transboundary waters are regulated by this Code and the international treaties of Turkmenistan.
5. If an international treaty of Turkmenistan establishes rules other than those contained in this Code, the rules of the international treaty shall apply.

**Article 3. Goals and Objectives of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan**
1. The goals of the water legislation of Turkmenistan are to achieve and maintain an ecologically safe and economically optimal level of water use and to ensure the protection of water to improve the living conditions of the population and preserve the environment.
2. The objectives of the water legislation of Turkmenistan are:
1) to implement state policy in the sphere of the use and protection of the water fund, water supply, and water disposal;
2) to provide a legal basis for supporting and developing sustainable water use and protection of the water fund, water supply, and water disposal;
3) to manage relations in the sphere of the study, exploration, rational and integrated use and protection of water resources, hydro-ameliorative systems, and hydraulic structures;
4) to determine the directions for the development of water management and the improvement of land amelioration;
5) to protect the population, territory, and economic facilities from emergency situations at hydraulic structures and the consequences caused by them.

**Article 4. Basic Principles of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan**
The water legislation of Turkmenistan is based on the following basic principles:
1) recognition of the state significance of water, which is the basis for the country's socio-economic development and the preservation of public health;
2) state management and state control in the sphere of water use and protection;
3) ensuring equal access to water for the population;
4) sustainable and rational use of water resources;
5) integrated (comprehensive) management of water resources;
6) combination of administrative-territorial and basin principles of water resources management;
7) creation of optimal conditions for water use, preservation of the ecological stability of the environment, and sanitary-epidemiological safety of the population;
8) priority of using fresh water for potable needs that meet quality standards;
9) prevention of the pollution, contamination, and depletion of water;
10) participation of citizens and public associations in resolving issues concerning the use and protection of water bodies, and in the preparation of decisions whose implementation may have a positive impact on water bodies during their use and protection;
11) ensuring transparency in the implementation of measures related to the use and protection of water, and accessibility of information on water use and protection;
12) payment for special water use, with the exception of certain types of special water use established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan;
13) liability for violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan;
14) compensation for damage caused as a result of a violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan;
15) international cooperation in the sphere of water use and protection, including through the regulation of water relations within the basins of transboundary water bodies.

**Article 5. Right of Ownership of the Water Fund of Turkmenistan**
1. The water fund of Turkmenistan is in the exclusive ownership of the state.
2. The right of possession, use, and disposal of the water fund belongs to the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
3. Actions by legal entities and natural persons that violate the right of state ownership of water bodies shall entail liability as provided for by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 6. Right of Ownership of Hydraulic Structures**
1. Hydraulic structures may be under state or other forms of ownership.
2. Relations associated with the possession, use, and disposal of hydraulic structures under other forms of ownership are regulated by the civil legislation of Turkmenistan, unless otherwise provided by this Code.
3. Inter-farm hydraulic structures and reservoirs that are in state ownership are transferred into the possession and use of state water management organizations.
4. Intra-farm hydraulic structures may be transferred into the possession and use, or into the ownership of legal entities and natural persons of Turkmenistan in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 7. Water Fund of Turkmenistan**
1. The aggregate of all water bodies constitutes the water fund of Turkmenistan.
2. The water fund of Turkmenistan includes the following types of water bodies:
1) surface water bodies:
   a) marine waters (within the water area of the Turkmen sector of the Caspian Sea);
   b) watercourses (rivers, streams, canals of irrigation and collector-drainage networks);
   c) water basins (lakes, ponds, flooded quarries, reservoirs);
   d) naturally emerging to the earth's surface and artificially extracted groundwater (springs, geysers, karizes, wells);
2) underground water bodies:
   a) groundwater basins;
   b) aquifers.

**Article 8. Subjects of Water Relations**
1. The subjects of water relations are the state, legal entities, and natural persons.
2. In the sphere of water relations, the state is represented by the authorized state bodies of Turkmenistan in the sphere of water use and protection within their competence as established by this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 9. Lands of the Water Fund**
1. Lands of the water fund include lands occupied by water basins (lakes, reservoirs, waters of the Turkmen sector of the Caspian Sea), watercourses (rivers, canals, collectors, hydraulic and other water management structures, inter-farm facilities), interstate collectors located on the territory of Turkmenistan, as well as lands allocated as right-of-way strips for the aforementioned water bodies and structures.
2. Lands of the water fund are intended for the construction, operation, and reconstruction of hydro-ameliorative systems.
3. Lands of the water fund are withdrawn from circulation, transferred to the relevant authorized state bodies, and used for their designated purpose.
4. The procedure for granting lands of the water fund for use, as well as the procedure for withdrawing these lands, shall be determined by the legislation of Turkmenistan.
5. The composition and size of the lands of the water fund, and the types of economic activity on these lands, are determined by the normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.
6. The main type of activity on the lands of the water fund is the operation of water bodies.

**Section II. STATE MANAGEMENT AND STATE CONTROL IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**CHAPTER II. STATE MANAGEMENT IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**Article 10. State Bodies Exercising Management in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
1. State management in the sphere of water use and protection is exercised by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan, authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection, local executive authorities, and local self-government bodies.
2. The authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection include:
1) the State Committee for Water Management of Turkmenistan (hereinafter referred to as the authorized body);
2) the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection;
3) the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology;
4) other authorized state bodies in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 11. Competence of the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan**
The Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan shall:
1) take measures to implement state programs in the sphere of water use and protection;
2) approve the main directions for the rational use and protection of water and the development of water management;
3) direct the activities of authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection;
4) approve water use limits for velayats and etraps, as well as for major water bodies and sectors of the economy;
5) adopt normative legal acts of Turkmenistan in the sphere of water use and protection;
6) declare water bodies or parts thereof as zones of ecological emergency or ecological disaster;
7) carry out cooperation with foreign states and international organizations on issues of the use and protection of transboundary waters;
8) exercise the right of possession, use, and disposal of the water fund of Turkmenistan;
9) determine the list of hydraulic and other water management structures of special strategic importance;
10) resolve other issues falling within its competence in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 12. Competence of the Authorized Body**
The authorized body shall:
1) conduct and implement state policy in the sphere of the use and protection of water bodies;
2) participate in the development of the main directions of state policy in the sphere of the integrated use and protection of water;
3) develop state programs for the development of land amelioration and water management;
4) approve, in the prescribed manner, the drilling of production wells for the extraction of groundwater and provide related services on a paid basis;
5) adopt, within its competence, normative legal acts of Turkmenistan in the sphere of water use and protection;
6) exercise, within its competence, control over compliance with the water legislation of Turkmenistan;
7) coordinate the work on compiling the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan and maintain said cadastre under the section "Water Use";
8) exercise state control in the sphere of water use and protection and organize work on the rational use and protection of water resources;
9) approve intra-farm, system-wide, etrap, velayat, and nationwide water use plans;
10) carry out work on the state accounting of water resources and their use;
11) establish water consumption limits for water users and monitor their observance;
12) carry out and coordinate work on maintaining the state monitoring of water bodies;
13) issue, on a paid basis, permits for special water use to legal entities and natural persons, and suspend permits for special water use;
14) issue, on a paid basis, the relevant document (Technical Specifications) for the construction of structures (bridges, as well as other structures), the laying of electrical and gas lines, and the capital repair and reconstruction of facilities on the territories and in the protective zones of hydro-ameliorative systems, separately located hydraulic structures, and surface water bodies (rivers) not included in them, as well as for water intake from them and the discharge of wastewater and return water into water bodies;
15) approve proposals for granting water bodies for joint use;
16) carry out design, survey, research, and development work related to the use and protection of water, and the construction and operation of hydro-ameliorative systems and water bodies;
17) develop comprehensive measures for hydro-technical amelioration;
18) develop and approve rules for the technical operation of hydraulic structures;
19) develop and implement measures to prevent and eliminate the consequences of mudflows and floods, flooding and destruction of the banks of watercourses and water basins, protective dams, and other hydraulic structures, and ensure interaction with other executive authorities;
20) carry out international cooperation on issues of regulating water relations, and the rational use and protection of transboundary waters in the manner prescribed by the international treaties of Turkmenistan and the legislation of Turkmenistan;
21) resolve other issues falling within its competence in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 13. Competence of the Authorized Executive Body in the Sphere of Environmental Protection**
The authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection shall:
1) exercise state control over the protection of surface and groundwaters (with the exception of hydrothermal waters), and the implementation of measures to prevent the pollution and depletion of water resources and their rational use;
2) conduct state ecological expert reviews of pre-design and design documentation for the construction and reconstruction of water management facilities and approve the performance of work on water bodies and in water protection zones;
3) prepare documents for making decisions on the suspension, termination of economic or other activities, or the re-profiling of ecologically harmful and production facilities, if this affects the condition of water bodies;
4) approve, in the prescribed manner, the drilling of production wells for the extraction of groundwater;
5) issue, in the prescribed manner, a conclusion on the irrigation of agricultural lands with wastewater;
6) issue, in the prescribed manner, a permit for the use of water bodies for the discharge of wastewater in agreement with the authorized body and the bodies exercising state sanitary supervision, protection of fish stocks, and local executive authorities;
7) monitor compliance with the established standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants into water bodies;
8) exercise state control over compliance with the requirements of the legislation of Turkmenistan, the regime of sanitary protection zones of water supply sources, and the adoption of measures to prevent and avert the pollution and depletion of water resources, and their rational and economical use;
9) exercise state control over the protection of waters in the water area of the Turkmen sector of the Caspian Sea in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan on environmental protection and the international treaties of Turkmenistan;
10) exercise control over the technical condition of the operation of water and air purification facilities and installations at industrial enterprises, sea vessels, and other floating craft, and the fulfillment by enterprises of the conditions of special water use, and compliance with the established procedure and conditions for wastewater discharge;
11) monitor the ecological situation in the country, including the identification of oil spills in the water area of the Turkmen sector of the Caspian Sea and determination of the amount of damage caused to the environment;
12) exercise environmental control over dredging operations in the Turkmen sector of the Caspian Sea;
13) participate in the work of state commissions for the acceptance and commissioning of new and reconstructed facilities for production, communal, and other purposes related to the use and protection of water resources;
14) approve the conditions for special water use;
15) resolve other issues falling within its competence in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 14. Competence of the Authorized Executive Body in the Sphere of Geology**
The authorized executive body in the sphere of geology shall:
1) exercise state control over the use and protection of groundwater and its deposits from depletion and pollution;
2) issue permits for the prospecting, exploration, and exploitation of groundwater deposits;
3) issue permits for the drilling of production wells for the extraction of groundwater;
4) maintain the state accounting of groundwater;
5) carry out state monitoring of groundwater;
6) maintain the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan with regard to groundwater deposits and organize, in the prescribed manner, the transfer of this data to the authorized body;
7) coordinate the activities of legal entities and natural persons in the sphere of groundwater use;
8) develop groundwater deposits;
9) approve the conditions for special water use in the case of groundwater use;
10) exercise state geological control over prospecting, exploration, and other work on the geological study of groundwater;
11) in case of a violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan concerning the use of groundwater, take measures, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, to restrict the right to use groundwater;
12) issue, in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, a permit for the disposal of waste in the earth's subsurface;
12¹) for the issuance of permits specified in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article, determine the fee, collect it, and transfer it to its own settlement account in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan;
13) resolve other issues falling within its competence in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 15. Territorial and Basin State Water Management Organizations**
1. Territorial and basin state water management organizations are bodies subordinate to the authorized body, whose main task is to exercise executive power and control in the sphere of water use and protection. When forming territorial and basin state water management organizations, geographical, historical, hydrographic, social, economic, and other factors are taken into account.
2. Regulations on territorial and basin state water management organizations shall be approved by the authorized body.
3. If necessary, for the purpose of ensuring the rational and integrated use and protection of water bodies, territorial and basin councils shall be created, whose tasks and functions are determined in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 16. Competence of Authorized State Bodies in the Sphere of Potable Water Use and Potable Water Supply**
The competence of authorized state bodies in the sphere of potable water use and potable water supply is determined by the legislation of Turkmenistan on potable water.

**Article 17. Competence of Local Executive Authorities**
Local executive authorities shall:
1) participate in the implementation of state policy in the sphere of water use and protection;
2) participate in the development of schemes, programs, and plans of measures related to the rational use and protection of water, and take measures for their implementation in the territory under their jurisdiction;
3) take measures to provide water to the population and sectors of the economy in the territory under their jurisdiction;
4) organize work to introduce water-saving technologies and methods for the rational use and protection of water in the territory under their jurisdiction;
5) organize work on the conclusion and execution of contracts between state water management organizations and water users for the supply of water in the required volume, including water intake exceeding the limit;
6) jointly with the authorized body, bear responsibility for compliance with the established limits on water supply to water users;
7) participate in the conservation and restoration of water resources, as well as in the implementation of measures to prevent the adverse effects of water and eliminate its consequences;
8) ensure the protection of the rights of water users within their powers;
9) approve decisions on granting water bodies or their parts for separate water use;
10) approve the siting and construction of production facilities and industries that affect the condition of water, as well as the conditions for carrying out construction, dredging, and other work on water bodies, in water protection zones, and in coastal water protection strips;
11) assist in resolving issues of ensuring the safety of hydraulic structures in the territory under their jurisdiction;
12) inform the population about the condition of water bodies located in the territory under their jurisdiction;
13) approve the location for the construction and installation of structures for water intake from water bodies (including boreholes) in the territory under their jurisdiction;
14) approve the conditions for special water use;
15) resolve other issues falling within their competence in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 18. Competence of Local Self-Government Bodies**
Local self-government bodies shall:
1) provide assistance in the development of schemes, programs, and plans of measures related to the rational use and protection of water, and take measures for their implementation in the territory under their jurisdiction;
2) assist in the implementation of measures for the rational use and protection of water bodies located in the territory under their jurisdiction;
3) organize work to introduce water-saving technologies and methods for the rational use and protection of water resources in the territory under their jurisdiction;
4) exercise control over compliance with the established limits on water supply to water users, as well as over the conclusion and execution of contracts between state water management organizations and water users for the supply of water in the required volume, including water intake exceeding the limit;
5) provide assistance in supplying water to the population and sectors of the economy in the territory under their jurisdiction;
6) participate in the implementation of measures to prevent the adverse effects of water and eliminate its consequences;
7) exercise control over the sanitary condition of water supply sources in the territory under their jurisdiction;
8) resolve other issues falling within their competence in accordance with this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 19. Participation of Citizens and Public Associations in the Implementation of Measures in the Sphere of Water Management**
Citizens and public associations have the right, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, to:
1) participate in the consideration by state bodies and organizations of issues related to the use and protection of water;
2) participate in inspections conducted by authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection to verify water users' compliance with water protection rules and measures, and to make proposals on these issues;
3) exercise public control over the use and protection of water bodies;
4) conduct public ecological expert reviews, inform the public of their results, and submit them to authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection, and make proposals regarding the siting, design, and construction of new and reconstruction of existing enterprises, structures, and other facilities related to the use and protection of water, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan;
5) receive, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, complete and reliable information on the condition of water bodies, sources of pollution, and the use and protection of water;
6) participate, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, in making decisions on issues related to the use and protection of water;
7) file claims in court for compensation for damage caused to the state and citizens as a result of the pollution, contamination, and depletion of water;
8) exercise other rights in the sphere of water use and protection in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER III. STATE CONTROL IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**Article 20. Functions of State Control in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
1. The functions of state control in the sphere of water use and protection are:
1) control over compliance by water users with the established procedure for the use and protection of water;
2) control over compliance with the rules for maintaining water records, as well as other rules established by the water legislation of Turkmenistan.
2. State control over the use and protection of water is exercised by authorized state bodies in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
3. The procedure for exercising state control over the use and protection of water shall be determined by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 21. Bodies Exercising State Control over Water Resources**
1. For the purpose of exercising state control over the use and protection of water, a Service for Control over the Use of Water Resources shall be established within the authorized body.
2. For the purpose of exercising state control over the protection of water, the implementation of measures to prevent its pollution and depletion, and the rational use of water, specialized services for ecological control and territorial local executive bodies in the sphere of environmental protection shall function within the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.
3. For the purpose of exercising state control over the regime of water intake and the protection of groundwater, a State Service for Geological Control shall be established within the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology.

**Section III. STATE PLANNING IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION. STATE WATER ACCOUNTING, STATE WATER CADASTRE OF TURKMENISTAN, AND STATE MONITORING OF WATER BODIES**

**CHAPTER IV. STATE PLANNING IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**Article 22. Objectives of State Planning in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
1. The objectives of state planning in the sphere of water use and protection are to ensure the scientifically-based distribution of water among water users, the protection of water, and the prevention of its adverse effects.
2. When conducting state planning in the sphere of water use and protection, the socio-economic development forecasts of Turkmenistan, water management balances, and schemes for the integrated use and protection of water shall be taken into account.

**Article 23. Water Management Balances**
1. Water management balances are intended to assess the availability and degree of use of water resources by basins of water bodies, water management zones, and for Turkmenistan as a whole.
2. Water management balances are developed by the authorized body with the participation of the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology and the authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology, and are approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
3. Expenses related to the development of water management balances shall be covered by the funds of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**Article 24. Schemes for the Integrated Use and Protection of Water**
1. Schemes for the integrated use and protection of water are subdivided into general, basin, and territorial schemes.
2. Schemes for the integrated use and protection of water are developed for the purpose of making decisions on issues of integrated (comprehensive) water resources management, determining the main water management and water protection measures for the rational use and protection of the water fund, aimed at satisfying the future water resource needs of the population and sectors of the economy, as well as ensuring the protection of water and preventing its adverse effects.
3. Schemes for the integrated use and protection of water are developed by the authorized body with the participation of the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, the authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology, and the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, with the involvement of scientific and specialized design organizations, based on the water needs of economic sectors, and are approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
4. Expenses related to the development of schemes for the integrated use and protection of water shall be covered by the funds of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER V. STATE WATER ACCOUNTING, STATE WATER CADASTRE OF TURKMENISTAN, AND STATE MONITORING OF WATER BODIES**

**Article 25. Objectives of State Water Accounting**
1. The objective of state water accounting is to establish information on the quantity and quality of water resources available on the territory of Turkmenistan, as well as data on water use and water disposal.
2. The state accounting of water and its use must ensure the acquisition of data necessary for:
1) developing the main directions of socio-economic development of Turkmenistan, and the current and long-term planning of water use and implementation of water protection measures;
2) compiling schemes for the integrated use and protection of water, water management balances, and maintaining the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan;
3) designing water management, transport, industrial, and other facilities and structures related to water use;
4) forecasting changes in hydrological and hydrogeological conditions, the water content of rivers, and water quality;
5) the operational management of hydro-ameliorative systems and the development of measures to increase their operational efficiency;
6) other needs provided for by the legislation of Turkmenistan.
3. State water accounting shall be carried out at the expense of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**Article 26. State Accounting of Surface Waters**
1. State accounting of surface waters is carried out by the authorized body jointly with the authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology by conducting continuous observations of the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of surface waters.
2. The authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology shall organize the conduct of continuous observations of the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of natural surface waters.

**Article 27. State Accounting of Groundwater**
State accounting of groundwater is carried out by the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology by conducting observations of the quantitative and qualitative characteristics of groundwater.

**Article 28. State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan**
1. The State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan is a systematized compilation of data on the condition and use of water bodies, their water resources, and water users.
2. The State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan is maintained according to a unified system and is based on data from state water accounting.
3. The maintenance of the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan is carried out by the authorized body on the basis of data provided by the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, the authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology, and other interested state bodies. The maintenance of the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan with regard to surface waters is carried out by the authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology, which shall organize, in the prescribed manner, the transfer of this data to the authorized body.
4. Water users are obliged to submit to the authorized body and the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology all necessary data subject to inclusion in the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan.
5. The authorized body is obliged, in the prescribed manner, to provide interested legal entities and natural persons with access to the information contained in the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan.
6. The maintenance of the State Water Cadastre of Turkmenistan shall be carried out at the expense of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**Article 29. State Monitoring of Water Bodies**
1. State monitoring of water bodies is a system of regular observations of the condition of water for the timely detection of changes in the condition of water, their assessment, and the prevention and elimination of the consequences of negative processes affecting the water quality in water bodies.
2. The authorized body, jointly with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized state body in the sphere of hydrometeorology, and the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, shall maintain the state monitoring of the condition of water bodies.
3. The maintenance of the state monitoring of water bodies shall be carried out at the expense of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**Section IV. WATER USE**

**CHAPTER VI. RIGHT TO USE WATER BODIES. TYPES OF WATER USE**

**Article 30. Right to Use Water Bodies**
The right to use water bodies is granted to legal entities and natural persons in the manner prescribed by this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 31. Granting of Water Bodies for Use**
Water bodies or parts thereof may be granted for use to legal entities and natural persons in the manner determined by this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 32. Purposes for Granting Water Bodies for Use**
Water bodies are granted for use to satisfy the potable, domestic, curative, resort, health, and other needs of the population, as well as agricultural, industrial, energy, transport, fishery, and other needs. Water bodies may be granted for use to meet water needs for one or more of the aforementioned purposes.

**Article 33. Types of Water Use**
Water use is subdivided into the following types:
1) general;
2) special;
3) joint;
4) separate;
5) primary and secondary.

**Article 34. General Water Use**
1. General water use is carried out to meet the needs of the population (bathing, boating, use of all types of sports boats and other watercraft, amateur and sport fishing, watering of animals) without the use of hydraulic structures or technical devices, without assigning water bodies to individual legal entities or natural persons, and without them obtaining a special permit.
2. Restricting public access to water bodies for general water use by installing prohibition signs, barriers, or guard posts is prohibited, except in cases provided for by this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.
3. General water use may be restricted or prohibited for the purpose of ensuring the ecological, sanitary, and epidemiological safety of the population, as well as the safe operation of hydraulic structures or technical devices. During general water use, compliance with sanitary norms and rules, as well as rules for the protection of fish stocks, navigation, protection of human life on water, and the rational use and protection of water, is mandatory. For these purposes, local executive authorities and local self-government bodies have the right to establish places in the territory under their jurisdiction where bathing, boating, water intake for potable and domestic needs, and livestock watering are prohibited, as well as to determine other conditions for general water use on water bodies located in the territory of the corresponding velayat, etrap, city, town, or village.
4. The conditions and rules for general water use are established on the basis of decisions by local executive authorities in agreement with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, and the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population. Said bodies are obliged to inform interested legal entities and natural persons of the conditions for general water use on individual water bodies.

**Article 35. Special Water Use**
1. Special water use is the use by legal entities and natural persons of water bodies or their parts with the application of hydraulic structures or technical devices to satisfy the potable and domestic needs of the population, meet the water needs of agriculture and fisheries, construction, industry, energy, as well as for the discharge of wastewater.
2. In certain cases, the use of water bodies without the application of hydraulic structures or technical devices, but which has a specific impact on the condition of the water, may also be classified as special water use.
3. Water use cannot be recognized as special if it is related to:
1) the passage of water through hydraulic complexes;
2) navigation;
3) the supply (pumping) of water to water users in low-water regions;
4) the elimination of the adverse effects of water (waterlogging, salinization, swamping);
5) the use of groundwater for the extraction of useful components;
6) the extraction of water from the subsurface along with the extraction of minerals;
7) the performance of construction work by the method of hydromechanization, dredging, and blasting operations;
8) the extraction of minerals;
9) the harvesting of aquatic plants;
10) the laying of pipelines and cables;
11) the conduct of drilling and geological exploration work;
12) the construction and operation of domestic wells and boreholes to a depth up to the surface of the first aquifer that is not a source of centralized water supply, as established in accordance with the normative legal acts of Turkmenistan;
13) the use of groundwater by means of constructing dug shaft wells, driven filter wells operating without forced water level reduction in the territory of rural settlements, towns, cities, state reserve lands, and forest fund lands, as well as in closed (non-flowing) water basins of no fishery significance, the capping (an engineering-technical structure) of springs, sources, and local runoff with a water intake volume established in accordance with the normative legal acts of Turkmenistan;
14) other works on water bodies that are performed without water intake and wastewater discharge.
4. Special water use is carried out on the basis of permits issued by the authorized body in agreement with the relevant state bodies in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan. The right of special water use arises for legal entities and natural persons from the moment they receive such a permit.
5. A permit for the use of groundwater by means of constructing dug shaft wells, driven filter wells operating without forced water level reduction in the territory of rural settlements, towns, cities, state land reserve lands, and forest fund lands shall be issued by the authorized body on the basis of a conclusion from the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology and in agreement with the relevant authorized state bodies and local executive authorities.
6. A permit for special water use by means of constructing capping of springs and sources in closed (non-flowing) water basins of no fishery significance shall be issued by the authorized body in agreement with the relevant authorized state bodies and local executive authorities.
7. The list of types of special water use shall be approved by the authorized body in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection and the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology.

**Article 36. Separate Water Use**
1. Separate water use is the granting of water bodies or parts thereof for use to only one legal entity or natural person.
2. On water bodies granted for separate use, general water use is permitted under conditions established by the primary water user in agreement with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, and local executive authorities.
3. A water user engaged in separate water use is obliged to announce the conditions or prohibition of general water use, unless otherwise established by decisions of local executive authorities.
4. Water bodies are granted for separate use in whole or in part on the basis of a decision by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan upon the submission of the authorized body, in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology and the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.
5. The procedure for initiating and considering petitions for granting water bodies for separate use shall be established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 37. Joint Water Use**
1. Joint water use is the granting of water bodies or parts thereof for use to several legal and/or natural persons.
2. Joint water use is carried out on the basis of a permit for special water use.
3. Water bodies not granted for separate use may be in joint use.
4. On water bodies granted for joint use, general water use is permitted under conditions established by local executive authorities.
5. Water users engaged in joint water use are obliged to announce the conditions or prohibition of general water use, unless otherwise established by decisions of local executive authorities.

**Article 38. Primary and Secondary Water Use**
1. Primary water use is the water use by legal entities and natural persons who carry out the intake and transport of water through canals and pipelines directly from state irrigation systems.
2. The supply of water to existing primary water users is carried out on the basis of a contract with the relevant territorial or basin state water management organizations subordinate to the authorized body.
3. Secondary water use is the water use by legal entities and natural persons who receive water from a primary water user on the basis of a contract with them.

**Article 39. Terms of Use for Water Bodies**
1. Water bodies are granted for permanent or temporary use.
2. Permanent use is recognized as the use of water bodies without a specified term.
3. Temporary use of water bodies can be short-term—up to five years, and long-term—from five to forty years. If necessary, the terms of use for water bodies may be extended for a period not exceeding, respectively, the terms of short-term or long-term temporary use. The terms of temporary use of water bodies may be extended at the request of the interested water user by the state bodies that made the decision to grant the water body for separate use or issued the permit for special water use.

**CHAPTER VII. RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF WATER USERS**

**Article 40. Rights of Water Users**
Water users have the right to:
1) use water resources for the purposes for which they are granted, in compliance with the requirements provided for by this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan;
2) exercise their right to use water resources without violating the rights and legitimate interests of other persons and without causing harm to water bodies and the environment;
3) not use the full volume of allocated water limits by means of its rational use based on the application of water-saving technologies, as well as in cases of changes in economic conditions or other circumstances;
4) carry out the construction and/or reconstruction of a hydro-ameliorative system or its individual parts in agreement with the relevant state water management organizations;
5) create, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, associations, groups, and other unions of water users;
6) receive, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, information on the condition of water bodies for the purpose of carrying out water management activities;
7) check the quality and quantity of the water provided;
8) protect their rights to water use in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan;
9) enjoy other rights provided for by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 41. Obligations of Water Users**
Water users are obliged to:
1) use water resources rationally, take care to use water economically, and restore and improve water quality;
2) take measures to reduce water consumption and decrease the discharge of wastewater by improving production technology and water supply schemes (application of waterless technological processes, air cooling, recycled and reuse water supply, and other technological methods);
3) use water bodies in accordance with the purposes and conditions of their provision;
4) comply with the established standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants and the established limits for water intake, as well as sanitary and other requirements;
5) implement measures to prevent the pollution of water bodies with wastewater;
6) maintain in proper condition the sanitary protection zones of potable and domestic water supply sources, coastal water protection strips, rights-of-way, coastal strips of waterways, treatment and other hydraulic structures, and technical devices;
7) keep records of the volume of water intake and use, monitor water quality and the quantity of return water and pollutants discharged into water bodies, and submit reports to the relevant state bodies in the manner prescribed by the normative legal acts of Turkmenistan;
7¹) install, at their own expense, modern water-measuring equipment and instruments on watercourses and water pipelines in order to maintain an accurate record of the volumes of water taken from them;
8) carry out technological, forest-ameliorative, agrotechnical, hydraulic, sanitary, and other measures, coordinated in the prescribed manner, for the protection of water from depletion, the improvement of its condition, as well as the cessation of the discharge of polluted wastewater;
9) take measures to reduce water losses to filtration and evaporation in hydro-ameliorative systems;
10) comply with the rules for the operation of intra-farm and inter-farm hydraulic structures;
11) take measures to prevent fish and other aquatic bioresources from entering hydro-ameliorative systems from water bodies of fishery significance;
12) make timely payments to the authorized body for the use of water resources, including for use exceeding the limit;
13) comply with the rules for driving livestock and the passage of tractors, agricultural machinery, and other vehicles across water bodies;
14) comply with the rules for watering and bathing livestock in water bodies;
15) allow state inspectors from authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection, as well as public inspectors for environmental protection, who are checking compliance with the requirements of the water legislation of Turkmenistan, unimpeded access to their facilities, and provide them with the necessary information;
16) promptly inform local executive authorities, the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, and the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population about the occurrence of accidental pollution;
17) carry out urgent work related to the elimination of the consequences of accidents that may lead to a deterioration in water quality, and provide the necessary technical means intended for the elimination of accidents on the water bodies of other water users, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan;
18) fulfill other obligations provided for by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 42. Guarantees for Securing the Rights of Water Users**
1. The right of water use is protected by the legislation of Turkmenistan. No one may be deprived of the right of water use except on the grounds specified in this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.
2. Interference in the activities of water users by state and other bodies, as well as organizations, is prohibited, except in cases provided for by this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.
3. Violated rights of water users are subject to restoration in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan. Damage caused as a result of a violation of the rights of water users is subject to compensation in the manner determined by Article 118 of this Code.

**Article 43. Restriction of the Rights of Water Users**
1. The rights of water users may be restricted in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan for the purpose of protecting public health, the environment, ensuring national security, as well as during periods of low water, and in natural and man-made emergency situations. The restriction of the rights of water users must not worsen the conditions for using water resources for the potable and domestic needs of the population.
3. The rights of water users to separate water use may be restricted by the authorized body that granted the given water body for separate use, and the rights to special and secondary water use may be restricted by the authorized bodies that issued the permit for said water use, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER VIII. GROUNDS AND PROCEDURE FOR TERMINATING THE RIGHT OF WATER USE**

**Article 44. Termination of the Right of Water Use**
1. The right of water use is subject to termination in the following cases:
1) waiver by the water user of the right of water use;
2) expiration of the term of water use;
3) use of the water body for a purpose other than that intended;
4) natural or artificial disappearance of water bodies;
5) the emergence of a need to withdraw water bodies from separate use for state and public needs;
6) transfer, in the prescribed manner, of hydraulic structures to other water users;
7) violation of the rules for water use and protection, as well as the terms of the water use agreement;
8) failure by water users to fulfill their obligations;
9) recognition of a water body as an object of special state (environmental) significance or representing scientific, cultural, or curative value.
2. Secondary water use may be terminated by a decision of the primary water user in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
3. The legislation of Turkmenistan may provide for other grounds for terminating the right of water use.

**Article 45. Grounds and Procedure for Terminating the Right of Special Water Use**
1. The right of special water use shall be terminated in the following cases:
1) at the request of the water user;
2) by a decision of the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan in the cases provided for in paragraphs 5 and 9 of part 1 of Article 44 of this Code;
3) by a decision of the authorized body that issued the permit for special water use, in the cases provided for in paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 of part 1 of Article 44 of this Code.
2. The right of special water use is terminated by the revocation of the permit for special water use by the authorized body. A decision to terminate the right of special water use is grounds for terminating the water use agreement.
3. A decision to terminate the right of special water use may be appealed in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 46. Withdrawal of Water Bodies from Separate Use**
1. The withdrawal of water bodies, in whole or in part, from separate water use is carried out by a decision of the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
2. The right of separate water use is terminated from the moment the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan makes a decision on the withdrawal of the water bodies or upon the expiration of the term of use of the water body.
3. Damage caused to legal entities and natural persons as a result of the termination of the right of separate water use or a change in the conditions of water use due to the withdrawal of a water body to satisfy state or public needs is subject to compensation in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER IX. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR POTABLE AND DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY**

**Article 47. Use of Water Bodies for Potable and Domestic Water Supply**
1. For potable and domestic water supply, as well as other needs of the population, water bodies whose water quality must comply with the established state standards of Turkmenistan shall be provided.
2. The use of potable water bodies to meet the needs of the population not related to potable and domestic water supply is generally not permitted. The use of potable water for the needs of economic sectors is permitted only in exceptional cases, if there is the technical feasibility of supplying water without prejudice to meeting the needs of the population, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 48. Centralized Water Supply for the Population**
1. When using water bodies for potable, domestic, and other needs of the population through a centralized water supply, legal entities that have a domestic and potable water supply network under their operational management, possession, and use have the right to take water from water supply sources in accordance with the approved designs of water intake structures and on the basis of permits for special water use to obtain water of potable quality and supply it to water consumers. Said legal entities are obliged to organize an accounting of the volume of water taken from supply sources, conduct regular observations of the condition of the water in them, maintain the sanitary protection zone of the water intake in proper condition, and report to the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population and to local executive authorities about deviations in the values of water quantity and quality indicators in the sources from the established standards.
2. At centralized groundwater intakes, a local network of observation wells must be established within their deposits and in adjacent territories.

**Article 49. Non-Centralized Water Supply for the Population**
When using water bodies for potable, domestic, and other needs of the population through a non-centralized water supply, legal entities and natural persons have the right to take water directly from surface or underground water bodies under the procedure for general or special water use. The use of water intake structures intended for these purposes shall be carried out in accordance with the rules established by the local executive authorities on whose territory the water intake structures are located.

**CHAPTER X. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR CURATIVE, HEALTH, AND RECREATIONAL PURPOSES**

**Article 50. Use of Water Bodies for Curative and Health Purposes**
1. Water bodies containing natural curative resources are used for curative and health purposes in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan on sanatorium-resort affairs and resorts.
2. Water bodies classified as curative and health-related in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan are used only for curative, resort, and health purposes. In exceptional cases, the authorized body and the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology and the authorized executive body in the sphere of healthcare and the medical industry, may permit the use of water bodies classified as curative and health-related for other purposes.
3. The discharge of wastewater and drainage water into water bodies classified as curative and health-related, as well as on their territories, is prohibited.

**Article 51. Use of Water Bodies for Recreational Purposes**
1. The use of water bodies for recreational purposes (recreation, tourism, sports) is permitted under the procedure for general water use.
2. Locations for mass recreation, tourism, and sports on water bodies and hydraulic structures are established by local executive authorities in agreement with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, the authorized state body for the protection of aquatic bioresources, and on navigable waterways, in agreement with the bodies that regulate navigation.
3. Legal entities and natural persons using water bodies for recreational purposes must provide them with rescue stations or posts equipped in accordance with the rules approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XI. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR AGRICULTURAL NEEDS**

**Article 52. Use of Water Bodies for Agricultural Needs**
1. The use of water bodies for agricultural needs is carried out under the procedure for general and special water use.
2. In special water use, irrigation, watering, collector-drainage networks, and other hydraulic structures and devices that are in the possession and use of legal entities and natural persons are applied.
3. The use of water bodies for watering pastures and supplying water to livestock farms is carried out under the procedure for special water use on the basis of a permit issued by the authorized body in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, the State Veterinary Service, as well as local executive authorities.
4. Monitoring and assessment of the ameliorative state of irrigated lands is conducted by the authorized body at the expense of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**Article 53. Planning of Water Use in Agriculture**
1. Water use in agriculture is carried out on the basis of contracts concluded between state water management organizations—the water suppliers—and water users in accordance with water use plans.
2. When planning the size and establishing the structure of sown areas of agricultural crops, determining the volume of water, and the terms of water use, water users must be guided by the conditions of limited water use in accordance with Article 102 of this Code. The conditions and procedure for providing water in excess of the established limits are determined in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
3. Intra-farm water use plans are developed by water users and approved by state water management organizations in agreement with local executive authorities.
4. To provide water users with irrigation water, a water use plan for Turkmenistan is drawn up, which is developed on the basis of water use plans for velayats, etraps, as well as for the territory of water body basins. The water use plan for Turkmenistan is approved by the authorized body.
5. The authorized body and its territorial and basin state water management organizations have the right to:
1) restrict the supply of water to water consumers if the water content of the irrigation source decreases (while observing the principle of equitable water supply);
2) adjust water supply plans for water users based on a changed water regime of the irrigation source, weather conditions, and other reasons necessitating a change in the volumes and timing of water supply.

**Article 54. Use of Wastewater and Drainage Water for Irrigation**
1. The use of wastewater and drainage water for irrigation is carried out in accordance with the established ecological and sanitary-epidemiological requirements.
2. Wastewater, depending on its source of origin, is subdivided into municipal-domestic and industrial water, as well as atmospheric precipitation.
3. The use of treated wastewater is permitted only for the irrigation of technical and fodder crops and green (forest) plantations on the basis of a permit issued by the authorized body and the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, in agreement with the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, the authorized body in the sphere of veterinary affairs, and local executive authorities.
4. The use of drainage water for irrigation is carried out on the basis of a permit issued by the authorized body and the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, in agreement with the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population and local executive authorities.

**Article 55. Provision of Water for Service Land Allotments, Personal Subsidiary Plots, and Garden Plots**
1. The provision of water for the personal subsidiary plots of natural persons residing on the territory of a legal entity-water user is carried out in accordance with the water use plan within the approved limit on a priority basis.
2. The provision of water for service land allotments, personal subsidiary plots, and garden plots located outside the territory of a legal entity-water user, and horticultural associations, is carried out in accordance with the water user's plan within the approved limit.

**Article 56. Agricultural Use of Water Sources with Temporary Watercourses**
Legal entities and natural persons, in agreement with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, and local executive authorities, may carry out measures to retain flood and mudflow waters for the irrigation of agricultural crops, hayfields, pastures, rain-fed farming plots, and livestock watering, taking into account ecological requirements.

**Article 57. Prohibition of Unauthorized Regulation of Hydraulic Structures**
Legal entities and natural persons are prohibited from independently regulating hydraulic structures on canals and reservoirs for the purpose of increasing or decreasing water flow, and from constructing temporary dams, pumping stations, and other structures on them.

**Article 58. Conditions for Watering and Bathing Animals, Driving Livestock, and Passage of Vehicles Across Canals and Other Hydraulic Structures**
1. Driving livestock and the passage of tractors, agricultural machinery, and other vehicles across canals and other hydraulic structures in places not designated for these purposes is prohibited.
2. The use of water bodies for watering and bathing livestock is permitted outside the sanitary protection zone and provided that there are watering sites and other devices that prevent the pollution and contamination of water bodies.

**Article 59. Inter-farm and Intra-farm Hydraulic Structures**
1. The inter-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network with the hydraulic and other structures located on them, which are in state ownership, are transferred to state water management organizations under the right of possession and use and are on the balance sheet of these organizations. The construction and maintenance in working condition of the inter-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic and other structures located on them are carried out at the expense of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.
2. The intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic and other structures located on them, which are in the possession and use, or ownership of Daikhan associations, agricultural enterprises, and other land users, may be transferred into the possession and use, or ownership of other water users under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.
3. The intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic and other structures located on them are on the balance sheet of the water users.
4. The maintenance in working condition of the intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic structures, technical, pumping, and other devices located on them is the responsibility of the Daikhan associations, water user associations, water user groups, and other water users in whose possession and use, or ownership they are.
5. State water management organizations responsible for providing irrigation water may, under contracts with Daikhan associations, water user associations, water user groups, and other water users, carry out work on a paid basis for the cleaning, repair, and operation of the intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic structures and technical devices located on them.
6. The procedure and conditions for payment for work on the cleaning, repair, and operation of the intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic structures and technical devices located on them shall be determined in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
7. Secondary water users who receive irrigation water from primary water users shall pay the costs for maintaining in working condition the intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic structures and technical devices located on them under the conditions and in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan. The costs (tariffs) for maintaining in working condition the intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic structures and technical devices located on them for the irrigation of agricultural crops included in the state order shall be established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan. The costs (tariffs) for maintaining in working condition the intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage network and the hydraulic structures and technical devices located on them for the irrigation of agricultural crops not included in the state order shall be established by the authorized body in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 60. Operation of Hydro-ameliorative Systems**
1. The operation of a hydro-ameliorative system is the production and management activity of maintaining the system and its elements in working condition, improving it, conducting engineering and ameliorative monitoring, and planning and operationally regulating the water regime of irrigated lands.
2. The main tasks of operating hydro-ameliorative systems are:
1) maintaining hydro-ameliorative systems and their individual elements in a serviceable (operable) condition, and taking measures to prevent their damage;
2) providing water to water users in accordance with the established limits and water supply schedules;
3) ensuring the disposal of collector-drainage water;
4) monitoring the technical condition of irrigation systems and the ameliorative state of irrigated lands;
5) improving and enhancing the technical level and operational capacity of hydro-ameliorative systems.
3. Maintaining hydro-ameliorative systems in working condition consists of the timely performance of maintenance and repair work to maintain and restore the operational capacity of the hydro-ameliorative system and its elements. Work on the maintenance and repair of hydro-ameliorative systems includes measures for continuous observation of their condition, protection from damage, siltation, and overgrowth, cleaning of sediments and weeds, repair of anti-filtration linings of hydro-ameliorative systems, and other measures. The performance of said work on hydro-ameliorative systems is carried out in accordance with the production plans of the state water management organizations and water users under whose authority the hydro-ameliorative systems are.

**Article 61. Operation of Hydraulic Structures Intended for Water Transport and Disposal**
1. The operation of hydraulic structures intended for water transport and disposal consists of maintaining the technical serviceability and operational capacity of these structures.
2. The main indicators of the technical serviceability and operational capacity of hydraulic structures intended for water transport and disposal are:
1) ensuring the design-based throughput capacity of canals and hydraulic structures;
2) maintaining the necessary water level in canals;
3) absence of siltation and overgrowth in canals;
4) minimal filtration and technological water losses in canals;
5) preventing the waterlogging of adjacent lands by filtration waters and their flooding by surface waters.
3. Work on the maintenance and repair of hydraulic structures intended for water transport and disposal is carried out in accordance with the production plans of the state water management organizations and water users under whose authority said structures are.

**CHAPTER XII. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR INDUSTRIAL AND ENERGY PURPOSES**

**Article 62. Procedure for Using Water Bodies for Industrial and Energy Purposes**
The use of water bodies for industrial and energy purposes is carried out under the procedure for special water use.

**Article 63. Restriction or Prohibition of the Use of Potable Water Bodies for Industrial and Production Needs**
1. The use of potable water bodies for industrial and production needs is generally not permitted.
2. The use of potable water to meet industrial and production needs is permitted only in exceptional cases and if there is the technical feasibility of such use without prejudice to meeting the needs of the population, on the basis of a decision by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
3. The use of potable water from domestic and potable water supply pipelines for industrial and production needs may be restricted or prohibited by local executive authorities jointly with the authorized executive body in the sphere of municipal services in cases of natural disasters, accidents, or other exceptional circumstances, as well as in the case of inefficient operation of facilities intended for wastewater treatment, or if an enterprise exceeds its established limit for potable water consumption.
4. The limit on potable water consumption for industrial and production needs from domestic and potable water supply pipelines shall be approved by the authorized executive body in the sphere of municipal services in agreement with local executive authorities.

**Article 64. Use of Groundwater for Technical Water Supply and Other Production Needs**
1. Groundwater not classified as potable and mineral water may be used for technical water supply and other production needs in compliance with the requirements for the rational use and protection of water, as well as environmental protection.
2. In accordance with part 2 of Article 47 of this Code, in territories where there are no surface water bodies or where there are water bodies incapable of providing the necessary water supply, but where there are sufficient reserves of groundwater suitable for potable and domestic water supply purposes, the use of groundwater for technical water supply and other production needs is permitted in exceptional cases, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 65. Use of Water Bodies for Energy Needs**
1. The use of water bodies for energy needs is carried out under the procedure for special water use, taking into account the interests of other water users, economic sectors, and the population residing near energy facilities, in compliance with the requirements for the integrated use and protection of water.
2. Organizations operating energy facilities on water bodies are obliged to ensure:
1) compliance with the established operating regime of reservoirs, while maintaining the priority of potable and domestic water supply;
2) the needs of fisheries in sections of rivers and reservoirs that are important for the preservation and reproduction of fish resources in floodplains and river deltas;
3) the unimpeded passage of vessels and rafts;
4) the implementation of established environmental, sanitary-epidemiological, and emergency releases.

**CHAPTER XIII. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR THE NEEDS OF FISHERIES, HUNTING, AND FORESTRY. USE OF WATER BODIES LOCATED IN SPECIALLY PROTECTED NATURAL AREAS**

**Article 66. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Fisheries**
1. Water bodies of fishery significance are granted for use for the commercial harvesting (catching) of aquatic bioresources in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.
2. The use of water bodies of fishery significance for purposes other than potable and domestic water supply may be restricted in the interests of the fishing industry by the authorized executive body for fisheries in agreement with the authorized body.
3. The obligations of legal entities and natural persons using water bodies of fishery significance are determined by the legislation of Turkmenistan on fisheries and the conservation of aquatic biological resources.

**Article 67. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Hunting Management**
1. Water bodies or their parts that serve as habitats for wild animals may, in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan, be granted for use to legal entities and natural persons for the conduct of hunting management.
2. Water bodies or their parts that serve as habitats for wild animals (aquatic hunting grounds) may be assigned to legal entities for the conduct of hunting management on the basis of a decision by the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, in agreement with the authorized body.
3. Hunting grounds do not include water bodies located:
1) on the territory of state nature reserves and their buffer zones;
2) in the reserve regime zone (core) of state biosphere reserves;
3) in the strict protection zone (reserve zone) and particularly sensitive zone of national nature parks;
4) on the territory of pond, lake, and other fish farms.
4. The procedure for conducting hydro-ameliorative works and the rules for fishing in the habitats of rare and valuable species of birds and fur-bearing animals shall be coordinated with the authorized state body for the protection of aquatic bioresources, the authorized body, and the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.

**Article 68. Preferential Rights of Hunting Enterprises to Use Water Bodies**
1. Preferential rights to use the waters of rivers, canals, lakes, and other water bodies that are habitats for wild waterfowl and valuable fur-bearing animals may be granted to hunting enterprises by the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, taking into account the requirements for the integrated use and protection of water.
2. In the habitats of rare and valuable species of waterfowl and fur-bearing animals, in organized hunting enterprises, as well as in areas where measures for the protection and reproduction of fauna representatives are being implemented, by a decision of local executive authorities, the presence of natural persons, amateur and commercial hunting, construction on the coastal strip, and other actions that worsen the conduct of hunting management may be prohibited or restricted.

**Article 69. Use of Water Bodies Located in Specially Protected Natural Areas**
The use of water bodies located in specially protected natural areas is carried out in the manner determined by the legislation of Turkmenistan on specially protected natural areas.

**Article 70. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Forestry and during Landscaping Works**
1. The use of water bodies for the needs of forestry and during landscaping works is carried out under the procedure for special water use.
2. In areas where there are no surface water bodies, but there are sufficient reserves of groundwater suitable for potable and domestic water supply purposes, the use of groundwater for the needs of forestry and during landscaping works is permitted in exceptional cases. In this case, the use of groundwater is carried out in accordance with the requirements established by this Code.

**CHAPTER XIV. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR TRANSPORT AND FIREFIGHTING NEEDS**

**Article 71. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Water Transport**
1. The surface water bodies of Turkmenistan—rivers, lakes, reservoirs, canals—are public waterways, except in cases where their use for these purposes is fully or partially prohibited, or they have been granted for separate use.
2. The procedure for classifying waterways as navigable, the list of internal waterways open to navigation, and the rules for the operation of waterways shall be established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 72. Use of Water Bodies for the Needs of Air Transport**
The use of water bodies for the mooring, takeoff, and landing of aircraft, as well as for other needs of air transport, is carried out in the manner established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 73. Use of Water Bodies for Firefighting Needs**
1. The intake of water resources for extinguishing fires is permitted from any water bodies without any permit and in the volume necessary to eliminate the fires.
2. The procedure for using water bodies for firefighting needs is established in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XV. USE OF WATER BODIES FOR THE DISCHARGE OF WASTEWATER, RETURN WATER, AND DRAINAGE WATER**

**Article 74. General Requirements and Conditions for Using Water Bodies for the Discharge of Wastewater, Return Water, and Drainage Water**
1. The use of water bodies for the discharge of wastewater and return water is carried out under the procedure for special water use.
2. The use of surface water bodies for the discharge of wastewater is prohibited, except in the cases provided for in part 3 of this Article.
3. The use of water bodies for the discharge of wastewater may be carried out in exceptional cases, provided that it is appropriately treated, on the basis of a permit issued by the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, in agreement with the authorized body, the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, and the authorized executive body for fisheries.
4. The discharge of drainage water may be carried out into water bodies specially designated for this purpose.
5. Water users are obliged to implement measures to prevent or cease the discharge of wastewater, return water, and drainage water into surface water bodies if they:
1) can be used in recycled or reuse water supply systems;
2) contain waste from which the extraction of valuable components is economically justified;
3) contain industrial raw materials, reagents, semi-finished products, and final products of enterprises in quantities exceeding the established standards for technological waste;
4) contain toxic substances and infectious disease agents;
5) exceed the maximum permissible standards for the volume of discharged pollutants;
6) have an adverse effect on water bodies, and in other cases.
6. The discharge of wastewater and drainage water onto the terrain (gullies, lowlands, quarries, mudflow channels, ravines) is prohibited.
7. In case of exceeding the established standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants, the discharge of wastewater and drainage water into surface water bodies may be restricted, temporarily prohibited (suspended), or terminated in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 75. Conditions for the Discharge of Drainage Water into Water Bodies**
Legal entities and natural persons operating collector-drainage networks to eliminate waterlogging or swamping, or to eliminate the consequences of secondary salinization of irrigated lands, are obliged to use effective technologies to reduce the natural and man-made pollution of drainage water before discharging it into water bodies.

**Article 76. Conditions for the Discharge of Mine, Quarry, and Pit Water into Water Bodies**
1. Legal entities that pump out mine, quarry, and pit water from the subsurface to prevent the flooding of mines, quarries, and pits during the extraction of minerals are obliged to use effective technologies that ensure a reduction in the maximum permissible level of mineralization of this water and the content of pollutants before discharge into water bodies.
2. The conditions for the discharge of mine, quarry, and pit water into water bodies are established in accordance with Article 74 of this Code.

**Article 77. Industrial Wastewater Accumulators and Technological Reservoirs**
1. Legal entities that have accumulators for industrial wastewater or mine, quarry, and pit water are obliged to take the necessary measures to treat this water, use effective technologies for its neutralization and utilization, and carry out the recultivation of the lands occupied by these accumulators.
2. The use of technological reservoirs (cooling ponds of thermal power stations, fish-rearing ponds, settling ponds, and other reservoirs) must be carried out in accordance with the norms and rules of operation defined in the technical designs, approved in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 78. Use of Underground Water Bodies for the Discharge of Wastewater**
The discharge of wastewater into underground water bodies (aquifers) that do not contain fresh water, including associated formation waters of oil and gas fields or mineralized mine and thermal waters that are formed on the basis of natural waters and cannot be treated by existing means, is permitted in exceptional cases after special studies have been conducted, on the basis of a permit issued by the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.

**Article 79. Disposal of Wastewater in the Earth's Subsurface**
The disposal in the earth's subsurface of wastewater that cannot be treated by existing means is permitted in exceptional cases after a special geological study of the relevant subsurface area and with the availability of design documentation for subsurface use, as well as in compliance with the requirements of the legislation of Turkmenistan on the subsurface.

**CHAPTER XVI. OPERATION OF RESERVOIRS**

**Article 80. Regime for Filling Reservoirs and Discharging Water from Reservoirs**
Legal entities operating reservoirs and the water-retaining and water-discharging structures located on them are obliged to comply with the regime for filling the reservoirs and discharging water from them, established taking into account the interests of all water users located in the zones of influence of the reservoirs.

**Article 81. Procedure for the Operation of Reservoirs**
1. The procedure for the operation of reservoirs is determined by rules approved by the authorized body for each reservoir individually, in agreement with the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, the authorized state body for the protection of aquatic bioresources, and other interested bodies.
2. The coordination of measures ensuring the proper technical condition and operation of reservoirs, as well as control over compliance with the rules for the operation of reservoirs, are carried out by the authorized body in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.
3. The operation of reservoirs that are in state ownership is carried out at the expense of the State Budget of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XVII. USE OF RIVERS**

**Article 82. Classification of Rivers of Turkmenistan**
1. Depending on the area of the catchment basin and/or the river's flow, rivers are divided into large, medium, and small.
2. Depending on their geographical location, rivers are divided into internal and transboundary.
3. The classification of rivers is carried out in the manner established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 83. Specifics of River Use**
1. For the purpose of protecting the water content of rivers, it is prohibited to:
1) change the relief of the river basin;
2) destroy the channels of drying-up rivers, streams, and watercourses;
3) straighten the channels of small rivers and deepen their beds below the natural level, or block them without constructing culverts, aqueducts, and other structures;
4) reduce the natural vegetation cover and forestation of the river basin;
5) plow floodplain lands and apply chemical agents to them;
6) carry out drainage amelioration works in waterlogged areas and tracts in the upper reaches of rivers;
7) grant land plots in river floodplains for any construction (except for hydraulic, hydrometric, and linear structures), as well as for horticulture and gardening;
8) carry out other works that may adversely affect or do affect the water content of the river and the quality of water in it.
2. Water users, as well as land users whose lands are located in a river basin, shall ensure the implementation of comprehensive measures to preserve the water content of rivers and protect them from pollution and contamination.

**Article 84. Set of Measures to Preserve the Water Content of Rivers and Protect Them from Pollution**
1. The set of measures to preserve the water content of rivers and protect them from pollution includes:
1) the creation of coastal water protection strips;
2) the creation of specialized services for the care of rivers, coastal water protection strips, hydraulic structures, and their maintenance in proper condition;
3) the introduction of a soil-protective farming system with a contour-ameliorative organization of the catchment area;
4) the implementation of agrotechnical, agro-forest-ameliorative, and hydraulic anti-erosion measures, as well as the creation of appropriate structures (culverts, aqueducts, and other structures) for the organized removal of surface runoff during the construction and operation of roads, railways, and other engineering communications;
5) the introduction of water-saving technologies, as well as the implementation of water protection measures provided for by this Code at enterprises, institutions, and organizations located in the river basin;
6) the protection of hydrological monuments of nature;
7) compliance with the rules and requirements for the use of water protection zones in accordance with the provisions of this Code and other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.
2. For the purpose of assessing the ecological state of a river basin and developing measures for the rational use and protection of water, a river passport shall be compiled in the manner determined by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 85. Regulation of River Flow, Creation of Artificial Water Bodies**
1. In order to preserve the hydrological, hydrobiological, and sanitary condition in the lower reaches of rivers, it is generally prohibited to construct reservoirs and ponds in their basin with a total volume exceeding the volume of the annual flow of the given river in a calculated low-water year.
2. The creation of artificial water bodies and water-retaining structures on rivers and in their basins, and the operation of damming and other hydraulic structures that affect the natural flow of surface waters and the state of groundwater, are permitted only on the basis of a permit issued by the authorized body, in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized state body for the protection of aquatic bioresources, and the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology.

**Article 86. Use of Temporary Surface Runoff**
1. Temporary surface runoff is formed as a result of atmospheric precipitation, snowmelt, or the emergence of groundwater onto the earth's surface or a watercourse, which occurs over a certain period of time.
2. Temporary surface runoff may be used for the potable needs of the population, livestock watering, and land irrigation. When using temporary surface runoff, legal entities and natural persons are obliged to take the necessary measures to protect the water from pollution and contamination. Disputes arising during the operation and use of waters of temporary surface runoff shall be resolved by local self-government bodies.
3. The design and construction of facilities (kakis, sardobas, khovuzes, and other reservoirs) for the collection and storage of temporary surface runoff are carried out in accordance with the normative legal acts of Turkmenistan.

**Article 87. Regulation of Surface Water Runoff Using Temporary Hydraulic Structures**
The regulation of surface water runoff using temporary hydraulic structures is carried out taking into account the integrated use and protection of water resources and shall be coordinated with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, and other interested bodies.

**Article 88. Use of Transboundary Water Bodies**
1. When using transboundary water bodies, legal entities and natural persons are obliged to:
1) take all necessary measures to prevent, limit, and reduce water pollution that has or may have a transboundary impact;
2) use transboundary water bodies in a reasonable and equitable manner, with special regard for their transboundary character;
3) fulfill other obligations related to the use and protection of transboundary water bodies in accordance with the international treaties of Turkmenistan.
2. The use and protection of transboundary water bodies are carried out in accordance with this Code, other normative legal acts of Turkmenistan, and the international treaties of Turkmenistan.

**Section V. PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES AND PREVENTION OF THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF WATER**

**CHAPTER XVIII. PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES**

**Article 89. General Requirements for the Protection of Water Bodies**
1. Water bodies are subject to protection from pollution, contamination, depletion, and other harmful effects that may worsen water supply conditions, cause harm to public health, lead to a decrease in aquatic bioresources and other resources of the animal and plant world, reduce land fertility, and other adverse phenomena due to changes in the physical, chemical, and biological indicators of water quality, a reduction in their capacity for natural self-purification, and a disruption of the hydrological and hydrogeological regime of water bodies.
2. Legal entities and natural persons whose activities affect the condition of water bodies are obliged to comply with the ecological requirements established by the legislation of Turkmenistan on environmental protection and to carry out organizational, technological, forest-ameliorative, agrotechnical, hydraulic, sanitary-epidemiological, and other measures that ensure the protection of water bodies from pollution, contamination, and depletion.

**Article 90. Protection of Water Bodies from Pollution and Contamination**
1. The protection of water bodies is carried out against all types of pollution and contamination that worsen the qualitative and hydrological state of the water body, as well as hinder the use of water bodies.
2. For the purpose of protecting water bodies from pollution and contamination, legal entities and natural persons are prohibited from:
1) discharging production, domestic, and other types of waste into water bodies;
2) discharging petroleum products, chemical, radioactive waste, and other waste from human economic and other activities;
3) polluting and contaminating the surfaces of catchment areas and the ice cover of water basins with production, domestic, and other waste, refuse, and emissions, as well as with petroleum and chemical products, the runoff of which would lead to a deterioration in the quality of surface and groundwaters;
4) polluting waters with fertilizers and pesticides.
3. If, during the conduct of drilling and other mining operations related to the prospecting, exploration, and exploitation of oil, gas, and other mineral deposits, underground aquifers are discovered, the legal entities conducting these operations are obliged to ensure their reliable isolation to prevent the pollution of groundwater. All types of wells must be equipped with regulating devices, and wells that are unsuitable for operation or whose use has been terminated must be conserved or decommissioned. The drilling of absorption wells for the discharge of industrial and domestic wastewater is prohibited in all cases where these wells may become a source of pollution of an aquifer suitable for potable and domestic water supply. The drilling of absorption wells is permitted in exceptional cases, with positive conclusions from the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, issued after special surveys in the area of drilling these wells and in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.
4. In the formation zone of groundwater deposits, it is not permitted to set up accumulators for solid and liquid domestic waste, dumps, or to site industrial, agricultural, and other facilities whose use may become a source of pollution of groundwater deposits.
5. Legal entities and natural persons operating groundwater intake structures are obliged to organize and observe the regime of the sanitary protection zone for groundwater.

**Article 91. Protection of Water Bodies from Depletion**
1. In order to prevent the depletion of water bodies, legal entities and natural persons using water bodies are obliged to carry out measures to prevent the depletion of water bodies.
2. Groundwater intake structures under the authority of legal entities and natural persons must be equipped with water-measuring devices for systematic observation of the groundwater level and for measuring the discharge rate of the intake structures during their operation.
3. Water protection measures aimed at preventing the depletion of water bodies, carried out by legal entities and natural persons, shall be preliminarily coordinated with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, the authorized executive body for fisheries, and local executive authorities.

**CHAPTER XIX. WATER PROTECTION ZONES AND COASTAL WATER PROTECTION STRIPS OF WATER BODIES**

**Article 92. Water Protection Zones and Coastal Water Protection Strips of Water Bodies**
1. To maintain water bodies in a condition that meets sanitary-hygienic and ecological requirements, to prevent their pollution, contamination, and depletion, as well as to preserve the habitat of aquatic bioresources and other objects of the plant and animal world, water protection zones and coastal water protection strips with a special regime of economic and other activities are established.
2. Coastal water protection strips are territories within a water protection zone where a stricter regime of economic and other activities is established compared to the regime of economic and other activities established in the water protection zone.
3. The legal regime of water protection zones and coastal water protection strips of water bodies is determined by regulations on water protection zones and coastal water protection strips, approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan upon the submission of the authorized body.
4. Land plots within water protection zones are not withdrawn from economic use and may be granted for temporary use to legal entities and natural persons in the manner prescribed by the land legislation of Turkmenistan, provided that the established requirements for the regime of economic and other activities in these zones are observed.
5. The establishment of water protection zones does not exclude the possibility of allocating lands of the water fund, sanitary protection zones of water bodies used for domestic and potable water supply, sanitary zones for fishery water basins, as well as sanitary protection districts of resorts, the boundaries and regime of use of which are established in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
6. Water protection zones and coastal water protection strips are not established for water bodies located in specially protected natural areas.
7. Local executive authorities are obliged to inform all interested legal entities and natural persons about the boundaries of water protection zones and coastal water protection strips, and the regime of economic and other activities in effect in these territories.
8. The boundaries of water protection zones and coastal water protection strips are established in situ (on the ground) in accordance with the land legislation of Turkmenistan. The regime of economic and other activities and the composition of soil-protective and water-protective measures within a water protection zone and coastal water protection strip are determined by the designs of the water protection zones and coastal water protection strips. The designs of water protection zones and coastal water protection strips of particularly large and important water bodies are approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan upon the submission of the authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection.

**Article 93. Right-of-Way Strips of Land**
1. For the needs of operation and protection from pollution, damage, and destruction of reservoirs, main and other canals, inter-farm and intra-farm irrigation and collector-drainage networks and the hydraulic and hydrometric structures located on them, as well as water basins and dams on rivers, right-of-way strips of land with a special regime for their use are established.
2. The dimensions of the right-of-way strips of land are established in accordance with the land allocation designs.

**Article 94. Sanitary Protection Zones of Water Bodies**
1. For the purpose of protecting water bodies for potable water supply, and for curative, resort, health, and other needs of the population, sanitary protection zones with a strict regime of economic and other activities adjacent to the water bodies are established.
2. The legal regime of sanitary protection zones of water bodies is determined in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XX. WARNING, PREVENTION, AND ELIMINATION OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF WATER AND ACCIDENTS ON WATER BODIES**

**Article 95. Planning and Implementation of Measures to Warn, Prevent, and Eliminate the Consequences of the Adverse Effects of Water**
Measures to warn, prevent, and eliminate the consequences of the adverse effects of water are provided for in the state programs for the economic and social development of Turkmenistan. In order to prevent the consequences of the adverse effects of flood and mudflow waters in the water protection zones and coastal water protection strips of rivers and other watercourses that are periodically flooded by floodwaters, and in mudflow-prone gullies, it is prohibited to allocate land plots to legal entities and natural persons, to plow lands, to construct production and non-production facilities, or to organize dacha plots and recreation centers. Periodically flooded river floodplains and mudflow-prone gullies must be occupied by forest and shrub plantations.

**Article 96. Commissions for the Prevention and Elimination of the Consequences of Natural Disasters Caused by the Adverse Effects of Water and Accidents on Water Bodies**
For the purpose of taking urgent measures to prevent and eliminate the consequences of natural disasters caused by the adverse effects of water, as well as accidents on water bodies, special commissions may be created by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan and local executive authorities, which, within their powers, shall make decisions that are binding on all legal entities and natural persons.

**Article 97. Zones of Ecological Emergency and Ecological Disaster**
1. Water bodies where, as a result of economic or other activities, a natural disaster, catastrophe, or accident, persistent negative changes in the state of the water occur that threaten the safety and health of the population, the state of natural ecological systems, and natural objects, shall be declared zones of ecological emergency in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.
2. Water bodies where, as a result of economic or other activities, a natural disaster, catastrophe, or accident, profound irreversible changes in the state of the water have occurred, leading to a deterioration in public health, a disruption of the natural balance, the destruction of natural ecological systems, the degradation of soils, and the destruction of objects of the plant and animal world, shall be declared zones of ecological disaster in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XXI. REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SITING, DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, AND COMMISSIONING OF ENTERPRISES, STRUCTURES, AND OTHER FACILITIES AFFECTING THE CONDITION OF WATER**

**Article 98. Conditions for the Siting, Design, Construction, Reconstruction, and Commissioning of Facilities Affecting the Condition of Water**
1. When siting, designing, constructing new and reconstructing existing enterprises, structures, and other facilities, as well as when operating hydraulic structures that affect the condition of water, measures must be implemented to ensure the rational use of water, the protection of water bodies from pollution, contamination, and depletion, the prevention of the adverse effects of water, as well as the protection of aquatic biological resources and other objects of the animal and plant world.
2. The siting, design, construction, reconstruction, and commissioning of enterprises, structures, and other facilities that affect the condition of water shall be coordinated with local executive authorities, the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population, and other state bodies in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan. When performing construction work, measures shall be taken for land recultivation, the reproduction and rational use of water resources, the improvement of the territory, and the enhancement of the environment.
3. Design documentation for the construction and reconstruction of facilities that affect the condition of water is subject to a state ecological expert review in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 99. Conditions for Prohibiting the Commissioning of Enterprises and Other Facilities Affecting the Condition of Water**
1. It is prohibited to commission:
1) new and reconstructed enterprises and other facilities not equipped with instruments for accounting for water intake and disposal, or with structures and devices that prevent adverse effects on water bodies;
2) production water wells without equipping them with water-regulating and control-and-measuring devices and establishing sanitary protection zones;
3) water intake structures without fish protection devices;
4) reservoirs until the measures provided for in the design documentation in the interests of developing the fishing industry have been carried out;
5) irrigation, ameliorative, drainage, and watering systems, reservoirs, and canals until the measures provided for in the design documentation to prevent the flooding, waterlogging, swamping, and salinization of lands, soil erosion, and the pollution and depletion of water bodies have been carried out;
6) vessels without devices for collecting polluted water generated on the vessels.
2. It is prohibited to design populated areas, industrial complexes, and other economic facilities before receiving a conclusion from the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology on the absence of fresh groundwater deposits under the sites where construction and installation work is planned.

**Article 100. Requirements for Performing Work on Water Bodies**
1. Construction, dredging, blasting, drilling, agricultural, and other work, the extraction of minerals and aquatic plants, the laying of pipelines, cables, and other communications, the cleaning of the bottom of water bodies, and the removal of objects of the plant world on water bodies, with the exception of work carried out on the basis of planned water management measures, as well as water management operational measures, shall be performed in agreement with the territorial or basin state water management organizations of the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, the authorized state body for the protection of aquatic bioresources, the authorized executive body in the sphere of geology, as well as local executive authorities and other state bodies in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
2. The performance of the work specified in part 1 of this Article in the Turkmen sector of the Caspian Sea shall be carried out in agreement with the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, and the authorized state body for the protection of aquatic bioresources.

**Section VI. REGULATION AND STANDARDIZATION IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**CHAPTER XXII. REGULATION AND STANDARDIZATION IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**Article 101. Unified System of Regulation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
1. A unified system of regulation in the sphere of water use and protection is established for the purpose of determining requirements for the quantity and quality of water, norms for the accuracy of measuring their indicators, and regulating the limits of the impact of production and other activities on water bodies.
2. For the purpose of the rational use and protection of water, the following standards are established:
1) standards for the ecological safety of water use;
2) ecological standards for the water quality of water bodies;
3) standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants into water bodies;
4) sectoral technological standards for the generation of pollutants discharged into water bodies;
5) technological standards for water use.
The legislation of Turkmenistan may establish other standards in the sphere of water use and protection.
3. Regulation in the sphere of water use and protection is carried out by the authorized body, the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection, and other state bodies within their competence.

**Article 102. Water Use Limits**
1. Water use is carried out on the basis of annually established limits.
2. Water use limits for velayats and etraps are approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan upon the submission of the authorized body, depending on the expected water content of water bodies.
3. Water use limits for specific water users are established by the authorized body and are mandatory for execution by water users, regardless of their departmental subordination and forms of ownership. When establishing said limits, the conditions of equitable water supply for all water users must be observed in accordance with the approved water use plans.
4. In the event of a change in forecast data on water content, as well as the ecological and sanitary-epidemiological state of water bodies, or weather conditions, the water use limits may be revised.
5. The provision of water to water users in the event of an increase in sown areas, a change in the structure of crops, the commissioning of new production capacities, and the implementation of other measures is carried out strictly within the limit established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 103. Standards for the Ecological Safety of Water Use**
1. To assess the possibility of using water from water bodies for the needs of the population and sectors of the economy, standards are established that ensure safe conditions for water use.
2. The standards for the ecological safety of water use are indicators of the maximum permissible concentration of harmful substances, including radioactive substances, in water bodies whose water is used to satisfy the potable, domestic, and other needs of the population and sectors of the economy. If necessary, for the purpose of using water for curative, resort, health, and other purposes, other standards for the ecological safety of water use may be established.
3. Standards for the ecological safety of water use are developed and approved by:
1) the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population—for water bodies whose water is used to satisfy the potable and domestic needs of the population;
2) the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection and other relevant state bodies—for water bodies whose water is used for the needs of economic sectors.

**Article 104. Ecological Standards for the Water Quality of Water Bodies**
1. To assess the ecological quality of the water of water bodies and the possibility of its use in economic and other activities, and for the purpose of exercising control in the sphere of water use and protection, ecological standards for water quality are established, which include physical, biological, chemical, and radiological indicators of water quality and indicators of the maximum permissible concentration of harmful substances in the water of water bodies, for various purposes of water use. In this case, the degree of pollution of water bodies is determined by the corresponding categories of water quality.
2. The standards and categories of water quality for water bodies are developed and approved by the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection and the authorized state body in the sphere of sanitary and epidemiological well-being of the population.

**Article 105. Standards for the Maximum Permissible Discharge of Pollutants into Water Bodies**
1. Standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants into water bodies are established for the purpose of maintaining them in a state that corresponds to ecological and sanitary-epidemiological requirements.
2. The standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants into water bodies and the list of regulated pollutants in water bodies are established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Article 106. Sectoral Technological Standards for the Generation of Pollutants Discharged into Water Bodies**
1. To assess the ecological safety of production, sectoral technological standards are established for the generation of pollutants discharged into water bodies, that is, standards for the maximum permissible concentration of harmful substances in wastewater that is formed in the process of producing one type of product while using the same raw material.
2. Sectoral technological standards for the generation of pollutants discharged into water bodies are developed and approved by the relevant ministries and departments in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.

**Article 107. Technological Standards for Water Use**
1. For the purpose of the rational use and protection of water, technological standards for water use are established, which include:
1) current technological standards for water use—for the existing level of technology;
2) prospective technological standards for water use—taking into account achievements at the level of advanced world technologies.
2. Technological standards for water use are developed and approved by the relevant ministries and departments in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of environmental protection.

**Article 108. Prohibition on Discharging into Water Bodies Pollutants for which Standards in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection Have Not Been Established**
1. The discharge into water bodies of pollutants for which standards of ecological safety of water use and standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants into water bodies have not been established is prohibited.
2. The clients for the development of standards for the ecological safety of water use and standards for the maximum permissible discharge of pollutants into water bodies are the water users who discharge the pollutants.

**Article 109. Standardization and Certification in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Standardization and certification in the sphere of water use and protection are carried out in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Section VII. ECONOMIC MECHANISM FOR ENSURING THE RATIONAL USE AND PROTECTION OF WATER**

**CHAPTER XXIII. ECONOMIC METHODS OF REGULATING WATER USE**

**Article 110. Types of Economic Regulation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
1. The main types of economic regulation in the sphere of water use and protection are:
1) the provision, on a paid basis, of services for the supply of water to water users and water disposal, including the performance of repair, restoration, and other water management works;
2) the development and financing of programs for the rational use and protection of water;
3) the provision to legal entities and natural persons, in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan, of credit and other benefits when they introduce water-saving technologies and implement other effective measures for the protection and rational use of water resources;
4) the creation of special funds and their use for the restoration and protection of water bodies;
5) compensation for damage caused to water bodies and hydraulic structures as a result of a violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan;
6) the application of penalties for administrative offenses in the sphere of water use and protection.
2. The economic mechanism for ensuring the rational use and protection of water may include other areas of economic regulation determined by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 111. Paid Use of Water Resources and Tariffs**
1. General water use in Turkmenistan is carried out free of charge.
2. Special water use in Turkmenistan is carried out on a paid basis, with the exception of certain types of special water use established by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
3. Tariffs for services for the supply of water to water users are established by the authorized body in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of finance and economy. Tariffs for services for the supply of water to water users are established on the basis of the standard volume of water, the actual costs incurred in supplying water to water users, and other criteria. An increased tariff is established for the volume of water supplied in excess of the standard for all types of special water use.
4. The procedure for collecting payment for services for the supply of water to water users is established in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
5. For the purpose of the rational use of water resources, differentiated tariff rates may be established for services for the supply of water for different categories of water users, taking into account the following criteria:
1) the state's expenses for water supply;
2) the quality of the water supplied;
3) the timeliness of water supply;
4) the use of the hydro-ameliorative system;
5) the territory to which water resources are supplied.
When establishing said tariff rates, other criteria may also be taken into account.
6. The rules for the paid use of water resources in Turkmenistan are approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.

**Section VIII. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION. LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION OF THE WATER LEGISLATION OF TURKMENISTAN. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**CHAPTER XXIV. RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**Article 112. Water Disputes**
Water disputes are disputes that arise between subjects of water relations on issues of the use and protection of water bodies, hydraulic structures, and on other issues of water relations.

**Article 113. Bodies Resolving Water Disputes**
1. Disputes arising between subjects of water relations are resolved through negotiations between the parties, their consideration by bodies created by associations of water users, as well as by local executive authorities, the authorized body, and other authorized state bodies in the sphere of water use and protection.
2. If a water dispute is not resolved by the bodies specified in part 1 of this Article, said dispute shall be resolved in a judicial proceeding in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
3. Disputes arising during the use and protection of water between state bodies are resolved by the Cabinet of Ministers of Turkmenistan.
4. Disputes arising during the use and protection of transboundary water bodies between Turkmenistan and other states are resolved in accordance with the international treaties of Turkmenistan.

**Article 114. Procedure for Considering Water Disputes**
1. Water disputes are considered with the participation of the parties involved in the water dispute. In the event of the failure of one of the parties to the water dispute to appear for negotiations without a valid reason, the dispute may be resolved in its absence. The decisions of bodies created by associations of water users must indicate the procedure and deadlines for the execution of the decision made, as well as the deadlines for taking measures to restore the violated right of the water user.
2. Decisions on water disputes may be appealed by the parties to the water dispute. Complaints against said decisions of bodies created by associations of water users, as well as of local executive authorities, are filed with higher state bodies. Water disputes are resolved in a judicial proceeding in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 115. Resolution of Property Disputes Related to Water Relations**
Property disputes related to water relations are resolved in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**Article 116. Return of Unlawfully Seized Water Bodies**
Unlawfully seized water bodies and hydraulic structures shall be returned to their rightful owner with compensation for the damage caused by the violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan during the time of their illegal use. The return of unlawfully seized water bodies is carried out in the manner prescribed by the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XXV. LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION OF THE WATER LEGISLATION OF TURKMENISTAN**

**Article 117. Liability for Violation of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan**
1. Violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan entails liability in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.
2. Holding guilty persons liable for violating the water legislation of Turkmenistan does not release them from the obligation to eliminate the violation committed and to compensate for the damage they have caused.

**Article 118. Compensation for Damage Caused to Water Bodies and Hydraulic Structures as a Result of Violation of the Water Legislation of Turkmenistan**
1. Persons who have caused damage to water bodies and hydraulic structures shall compensate for it voluntarily or in a judicial proceeding.
2. The methodology for calculating the amount of damage caused to water bodies and hydraulic structures as a result of a violation of the water legislation of Turkmenistan is approved by the authorized body in agreement with the authorized executive body in the sphere of finance and economy.
3. Legal entities and natural persons who have caused damage to water bodies and hydraulic structures are obliged to compensate for it in accordance with the legislation of Turkmenistan.

**CHAPTER XXVI. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN THE SPHERE OF WATER USE AND PROTECTION**

**Article 119. International Cooperation in the Sphere of Water Use and Protection**
Turkmenistan carries out international cooperation in the sphere of water use and protection in accordance with the universally recognized principles and norms of international law and the provisions of the international treaties of Turkmenistan.

**Article 120. Main Directions of International Cooperation in the Sphere of the Use and Protection of Transboundary Waters**
1. International cooperation in the sphere of the use and protection of transboundary waters is ensured through the conclusion by Turkmenistan of international bilateral or multilateral treaties, and participation in the activities of international organizations and funds.
2. The international cooperation of Turkmenistan with neighboring states in the sphere of the protection and use of transboundary waters includes:
1) the implementation of joint collective activities for the purpose of the optimal use and protection of transboundary waters and their associated ecosystems;
2) the implementation of measures to prevent, limit, and reduce water pollution that has or may have a transboundary impact, and to minimize the risk of significant transboundary harm;
3) ensuring the use of transboundary waters in a reasonable and equitable manner, taking into account their transboundary character;
4) the development and coordination of programs for monitoring the state of the waters of transboundary water bodies and participation in their implementation;
5) the exchange of information on the water management situation in the basins of transboundary rivers, and the operational notification and provision of mutual assistance in emergency water situations;
6) the development, coordination, and implementation of measures for the joint operation of transboundary waters and hydraulic structures;
7) the creation, if necessary, of an interstate body for the management of transboundary waters for the joint implementation of interstate and intergovernmental agreements in the sphere of the use and protection of transboundary waters, ratified by Turkmenistan;
8) the conduct of joint scientific research to solve water problems.

