

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
1
 
 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 
Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
 
We Zayed Bin Sultan Al Nahyan                                                                 UAE President, 
− After having perused the provisions of the constitution, and 
− Federal Law No. (1) of 1972 Concerning the Jurisdictions of Ministers and Authorities 
Vested in Ministers and its amendments, and 
− Federal Law No. (3) of 1979 Concerning Civil Defence and its amendments, and 
− Federal Law No. (7) of 1979 Concerning Agricultural Interdiction and its amendments, 
and 
− Federal Law No. (8) of 1980 Regulating Labour Relationships and its amendments, and 
− Federal Law No. (21) of 1981 Concerning the Establishment of the General Authority for 
Water Resources Management in the United Arab Emirates and its amendments, and 
− Federal Law No. (26) of 1981 Concerning the Maritime Commercial Law and its 
amendments, and 
− Decree by Law No. (9) of 1983 Regulating the Hunting of Birds and Animals, and 
− Civil Transactions Law Issued under Federal Law No. (5) of 1985 and its amendments, and 
− Penal Code Issued under Federal Law No. (3) of 1987, and 
− Penal Procedures Code Issued under Federal Law No. (35) of 1992, and 
− Federal Law No. (39) of 1992 Concerning the Production, Importation and Handling of 
Fertilizers and Agricultural Additives, and 
− Federal Law No. (41) of 1992 Concerning Agricultural Pesticides, and 
− Federal Law No. (7) of 1993 Concerning the Establishment of the Federal Environmental 
Agency, and 
− Federal Law No. (19) of 1993 Concerning the Definition of Territorial Waters of the United 
Arab Emirates, and 
− In Accordance with the Proposal Submitted by the Minister of Health and Approval of the 


--- PAGE 2 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
2
 
 
Cabinet of Ministers and the Federal Council, and Ratification of the Federal Supreme 
Council, 
 
We hereby issued the following Law: 
  
Article (1) 
 Definitions 
In implementation of the provisions of this law, the following words and phrases shall bear 
the meanings given opposite each unless the context otherwise requires: 
 
State 
: The United Arab Emirates. 
Agency 
: The Federal Environmental Agency. 
Board of 
Directors 
: The Board of Directors of the Agency. 
Chairman 
: The Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Agency. 
Competent 
Authorities 
: Local Authorities in each Emirate of the United Arab Emirates. 
Concerned 
Parties 
: All parties concerned with the environmental affairs and development in 
the United Arab Emirates. 
Environment 
: The biosphere in which different forms of life are manifested and consists 
of two elements: 
Natural Element: Comprises living creatures to include man, animal, 
plant, and other living creatures, natural resources to include water, soil, 
organic and inorganic substances and natural systems. 
Unnatural Element: Comprises all that man introduced into the natural 
environment, to include fixed and movable installations, roads, bridges, 
airports, means of transportation and innovative industries, inventions 
and technologies. 
Marine 
: The marine waters and their contents of natural resources, plants, fishes, 


--- PAGE 3 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
3
 
 
Environment 
other marine creatures, and the above atmosphere, as well as fixed and 
movable installations and projects established in the marine 
environment. The boundaries of the Marine Environment extend to the 
economic zone of the State. 
Water 
Environment 
: Marine environment and inland waters including ground, spring and 
valleys waters and the natural resources, plants, fishes and other living 
organisms as well as the above atmosphere, fixed and movable 
installations and projects established on such waters. 
Ecological 
Systems 
 
: The comprehensive system comprising all components of the natural 
elements of the environment which complement and interact with each 
other. 
Natural 
Resources 
: All resources that exist without the involvement of man. 
Natural 
Reserves 
: Land or waters with special environmental nature (birds, animals, fish, 
plants or natural phenomena) having cultural, aesthetical, or 
environmental value and determined by a Decree issued by the Cabinet 
of Ministers in response to a proposal by the Agency or a Resolution by 
the Competent Authorities. 
Environment 
Degradation 
: The effects, which diminish the value, deform the nature of the 
environment, deplete the resources or harm living creatures or 
archaeological sites of the environment.  
Environment 
Pollution 
: Pollution resulting naturally or unnaturally from direct or indirect, 
intentional or unintentional introduction of any materials or polluting 
factors into the natural elements of the environment and as a result of 
which arises any danger to human health, botanical or animal life or harm 
to the resources and ecosystems. 
Materials and Pol-
luting Factors 
: Any form of materials such as solids, liquids, gases, smoke, vapours, odor, 
noise, radiation, heat, light glow or vibrations produced naturally or as a 
result of human activities that lead directly or indirectly to the pollution 
and degradation of the environment or harm human beings or living 


--- PAGE 4 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
4
 
 
creatures. 
Air Pollution 
: Any change in the characteristics and properties of the ambient air, and 
the air in work places and the air in closed and semi-closed public places, 
produced by natural factors or human activity which may affect human 
health and the environment. 
Water 
Pollution 
: The introduction of any substance or energy into the water environment 
by intentional or unintentional, direct or indirect means which adversely 
affect living or non-living resources, endangers human health or impedes 
water activities including fishing and tourism or impairs the quality for 
use or changes the properties of water. 
Pollutants of 
Water 
Environment 
: Any substance which when discharged int the water environment, 
directly or indirectly, intentionally or unintentionally changes its 
properties in a manner which harms human beings and other living 
creatures or natural resources or the water environment or tourist areas 
or interferes with other authorized uses of the water environment. 
Environmental 
Monitoring 
Networks 
: Working units monitoring the components and pollutants of the 
environment and provide data to relevant parties on regular basis. 
Environmental 
Impact 
Assessment 
: The study and analysis of environmental feasibility of activities, the 
establishment and practice of which may affect environmental safety. 
Environmental 
Protection 
: Preservation of the components, properties and natural balance of the 
environment, prevention and control of pollution, reduction and 
conservation of natural resources and rationalization, consumption and 
protection of living creatures which survive in such resources specially 
endangered species and devoting efforts to the development and 
upgrading of all these components. 
Environmental 
Development 
: Policies and regulations fulfilling social, cultural and economic needs of 
sustainable development in the State and achieving the objectives and 
principles for which this law has been enacted, and most importantly, the 


--- PAGE 5 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
5
 
 
preservation of natural resources as well as biological diversity and 
present and future historical, archaeological and natural heritage of the 
State. 
Sustainable 
Development 
: Linkage of environmental issues with the policy for development and 
planning to fulfill the needs and aspirations of the present without 
undermining the ability to achieve future needs and aspirations. 
Environmental 
Disaster 
: The accident resulting from natural or man made factors and causing 
serious damage to the environment which requires intervention 
potentials beyond local capabilities. 
Hazardous 
Substances 
: Solid, liquid or gaseous substances having properties harmful to human 
health or adverse impact on the environment such as toxic substances, 
explosive, flammable, or ionizing radioactive substances. 
Harmful 
Substances 
: All substances such as chemical, biological or radioactive materials, 
leading, directly or indirectly, to harmful effects on human health or the 
environment. 
Wastes 
: All hazardous and non-hazardous remnants and wastes, including 
nuclear wastes, disposed of or need to be disposed of in accordance with 
the provisions of the law and include: 
Solid Wastes: such as domestic, industrial, agricultural, medical, 
construction and demolition wastes. 
Liquid Wastes: produced by domestic, commercial, industrial and other 
premises. 
Gaseous (smoke, vapour and dust) Wastes: produced by domestic 
premises, bakeries, incinerators, factories, crushing plants, stone quarries, 
power stations, oil works and means of transportation and 
communication. 
Hazardous Wastes: residues or ash of different activities and 
operations containing properties of hazardous substances. 
Medical Wastes: Wastes constituted wholly or partially of human or 
animal tissues, blood or other body fluids or excretions or drugs or other 


--- PAGE 6 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
6
 
 
pharmaceutical products or bandages, needles, syringes, sharp medical 
objects or any other contagious, chemical or radioactive wastes produced 
by medical or nursing activities, treatment or health care, dentistry or 
veterinary and pharmaceutical practices or manufacturing, research, 
teaching, sample taking or storage. 
Waste 
Management 
: Collection, storage, transportation, recycling and disposal of wastes 
including the care of disposal sites. 
Waste 
Handling 
: All operations from the time of generation of wastes to their safe disposal, 
including collection, storage, treatment and recycling or disposal. 
Waste Disposal 
: Operations no involving extraction or reuse of substances such as burial, 
deep injection, biological or physical-chemical treatment, permanent 
storage, destruction or any other method approved by the competent 
authorities. 
Waste 
Recycling  
: Operations carried out on wastes, for the extraction or reuse of 
substances such as use for fuel, extraction of metals and organic 
substances, soil treatment or waste oil refining. 
Marine Means 
of 
Transportation 
: Means of transportation operating or meant to operate in the marine 
environment regardless of power, load capacity or purpose of navigation 
including vessels, scooter boats, hoover crafts and floating objects, fixed 
and floating platforms and hydroplanes. 
Means for Oil 
Transportation 
: Means used for loading, transportation, pumping or unloading of oil 
including pipelines. 
Establishments 
: Industrial, tourism establishments and establishments for production 
and generation of electricity and establishments for explorations, 
production, transportation and use of oil and infrastructure projects and 
any other establishments 
Oil 
: All forms of crude oil and oil products including any kind of liquid-
hydrocarbons, lubrication and fuel, refined and furnace oils, tar and other 
substances extracted from oil or its by products or wastes. 
Oil Mixture 
: Any aqueous mixture containing an amount of oil that exceeds 15 ppm. 


--- PAGE 7 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
7
 
 
Dirty Ballast 
Water 
: Dirty ballast water disposed off the ship's tank if its oil content exceeds 
15 ppm. 
Discharge 
: Any leakage, spill, emission or draining of polluting substances or the 
disposal of such substances into the water environment, land or air. 
Dumping 
: a) Any deliberate disposal of pollutants or refuse from ships, aircrafts, 
quays, or other means into the marine 
environment. 
b) Any deliberate dumping from ships or industrial installations or other 
means into the marine environment. 
Means of 
Transportation 
: Aeroplanes, cars, trains, tractors, motorcycles or other road machineries. 
Noise 
: Sounds, vibrations or sound frequencies causing nuisance or harm to 
public health. 
Public 
Premises 
: Places set up to receive the public or a certain group of people for any 
purpose. 
Closed Public 
Premises 
: Public places as complete buildings not allowing air entry except through 
specially designed inlets. Public transportation means are classified 
among such premises. 
Semi-Closed 
Public 
Premises 
: Public places such as incomplete buildings allowing air entry but cannot 
be closed completely. 
  
Article (2)  
Objectives and General Principles 
This law aims to achieve the following goals: 
1. Protection and conservation of the quality and natural balance of the environment. 
2. Control of all forms of pollution and avoidance of any immediate or long-term harmful 
effects resulting from economic, agricultural, industrial, development or other programmes 
aiming at improving life standards and co-ordination among the Agency, Competent 
Authorities and Parties concerned with the protection of the environment and conservation 


--- PAGE 8 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
8
 
 
of the quality, natural balance and consolidation of environmental awareness and principles 
of pollution control. 
3. Development of natural resources and conservation of biological diversity in the region of 
the state and the exploitation of such resources with consideration of present and future 
generations. 
4. Protection of society, human health and the health of other living creatures from activities 
and acts, which are environmentally harmful or impede authorized use of the environmental 
setting. 
5. Protection of the State environment from the harmful effects of activities undertaken 
outside the region of the State. 
6. Compliance with international and regional conventions ratified or approved by the State 
regarding environmental protection, control of pollution and conservation of natural 
resources. 
  
Section (1) Development and the Environment 
Chapter (1) Environmental Impact of Establishments 
Article (3) 
The Agency, in consultation with the Competent Authorities and Concerned Parties shall set 
the standards, specifications, principles and regulations for the assessment of environmental 
impact of projects and establishments applying for license and shall specially undertake the 
following: 
1. Identification of categories of projects, which due to their nature may cause harm to the 
environment. 
2. Identification of areas and sites of special environmental importance or sensitivity such as 
historical and archaeological sites, wet lands, coral reefs, natural reservations and public 
parks. 
3. Identification of natural resources and major environmental problems of special 
importance. 
  
 


--- PAGE 9 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
9
 
 
Article (4) 
Without contravention to the provisions of the above Article, the Agency, in coordination with 
the Competent Authorities and Concerned Parties shall undertake the evaluation of 
environmental impact of the project and establishment to be licensed. 
No project or establishment shall start the activity before obtaining the license 
aforementioned in the previous Article including environmental impact assessment. 
  
Article (5) 
The applicant for license shall attach with his application a complete statement on the project 
or activity intended to be undertaken including all information required in accordance with 
the Executive Order and forms included therein. 
  
Article (6) 
The Agency shall, in coordination with the Competent Authorities, decide on the applications 
submitted, within a period not exceeding one month from the date of submission of the 
application. The applicant shall be notified of the decision and the reasons for rejection of his 
application if rejected. The period stated in the above paragraph may be exterded by one 
month if need arises. 
  
Article (7) 
Owners of projects or establishments approved by license shall undertake regular analysis of 
wastes and monitor the properties of discharge and pollutants generated from such projects 
including degradable materials and keeping monitoring records and sending reports with the 
results to the Agency and the Competent Authorities. 
  
Article (8) 
The Executive Order shall specify the period required for keeping all the records referred to in 
Article (7) of this Law. 
  


--- PAGE 10 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
10
 
 
Chapter Two 
The Environment and Sustainable Development 
Article (9) 
All Concerned Parties specially parties responsible for planning, economic and construction 
development shall consider aspects of protection of the environment, control of pollution and 
rational use of natural resources when developing economic and social plans and when 
establishing and executing of projects. 
  
Article (10) 
The Agency shall, in consultation and coordination with the Competent Authorities and 
Concerned Parties, undertake the preparation, issuance, revision, development and updating 
measurements and standards of environment protection. 
The balance between technological capabilities available and economic cost shall be 
considered when determining such measurements and standards without undermining the 
requirements for the protection of environment and control of pollution. 
  
Article (11) 
In the case of emergencies and if deemed necessary to protect lives or ensure the safety of the 
establishment or work area, non-compliance with the measurements and standards issued 
under the application of the provisions of this law is permitted and the Agency and Competent 
Authorities are to be notified. 
Article (12) 
It is prohibited to hunt, kill or capture birds, wild and marine animals identified in the 
Executive Order and it is forbidden to possess, transport, sell or roam with these animals, alive 
or dead, without obtaining licensure from the Competent Authorities. It is also prohibited to 
damage birds' nests or destroy their eggs. The Executive Order shall determine the areas 
licensed for hunting, and stipulate the conditions for licensing and the means of supervision 
for the execution of this Article. 
  


--- PAGE 11 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
11
 
 
Article (12) 
It is prohibited to hunt, kill or capture birds, wild and marine animals identified in lists bearing 
the numbers (1, 2 and 3) attached hereto. It is prohibited to possess, transport, wander with, 
sell or offer such birds or animals for sale, alive or dead, without obtaining a licence from the 
competent authorities. It is also prohibited to damage the nests or destroy the eggs of the said 
birds. The executive regulations shall determine the areas licensed for hunting, the conditions 
for licensing and the means of supervision that are necessary for the implementation of this 
Article. 
The Competent Minister may, in coordination with the Competent Authority, amend the three 
lists attached to this law by deletion, addition or transfer. 
  
Chapter 3 
Environmental Monitoring  
Article (13) 
The Agency shall in coordination with the Competent Authorities and Concerned Parties, 
develop a national system for environmental monitoring. The Competent Authorities shall 
undertake the establishment, operation and supervision of the environmental monitoring 
networks. 
  
Article (14) 
The environmental monitoring networks shall notify the Agency, Competent Authorities and 
Concerned Parties of any violation of the permissible limits of environmental pollutants, and 
should submit periodical reports of the results in accordance with the provisions of the 
Executive Order. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 12 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
12
 
 
Chapter Four 
Emergency Plans for Combating Environmental Disasters 
Article (15) 
The Agency shall, in coordination with the Competent Authorities and cooperation and 
consultation with the Concerned Parties in the State, establish plans to combat environmental 
emergencies and disasters. Such plans and their budgets shall be approved by a resolution 
issued by the Cabinet of Ministers. 
 
Article (16) 
All parties and individuals in the State shall endevour to offer their help and potentials needed 
to combat environmental disasters. 
  
Section Two 
Protection of Water Environment 
Chapter One 
The Scope of Environemntal Protection 
Article (17) 
Protection of water environment from pollution aims to achieve the following: 
1. Protection of the coasts, beaches and seaports of the State from all kinds and forms of 
pollution. 
2. Protection of the marine environment and its living and non-living natural resources by 
prevention, reduction and control of pollution regardless of its source. 
3. Protection of drinking water and ground water and development of water resources. 
  
Article (18) 
Parties licensed to prospect, extract or exploit onshore or offshore oil and gas fields are 
prohibited from discharging any polluting substance resulting from drilling, exploring, testing 
of wells or producticn into the water environment or land area in the vicinity of activities 
referred to in this Article, unless safety measures to safeguard against causing harm to land 


--- PAGE 13 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
13
 
 
and water environments are adopted and the treatment of discharged waste and polluting 
substances by the most recent technical systems available in accordance with the conditions 
provided for in the approved regional and international conventions and protocols. 
  
Article (19) 
The Agency shall in coordination with the Competent Authorities and cooperation and 
coordination of the parties licensed for the exploration, extraction or exploitation of oil and 
gas fields, undertake the preparation of guidelines of specifications on the conditions of 
environmental safety and management of waste resulting from the production, 
transportation and exploitation of oil and gas. 
  
Article (20) 
The Agency shall in coordination with the Competent Authorities and cooperation and 
coordination of the parties mentioned in Articles (18) and (19) of this Law, carry out periodical 
monitoring of the environmental impact resulting from the exploration, extraction and 
exploitation of oil and gas taking place in the production fields and land and marine 
transportation routes. 
  
Chapter Two 
Protection of The Marine Environment 
Part One 
Pollution from Marine Means of Transportation 
Article (21) 
All marine means of transportation are prohibined from discharging or disposing of oil or oil 
mixture into the marine environment, regardless of their nationality or registration status in 
the State. 
  
 
 


--- PAGE 14 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
14
 
 
Article (22) 
The captain or officer in charge of the marine means of transportation shall take sufficient 
measures of protection from the e Ifects of pollution in the event of the occurrence of an 
accident involving a means that carries oil which may result or likely to result in pollution of 
the marine environment of the State and shall implement the orders of the inspectors of the 
administrative parties or, in this case, the judicial officers. 
  
Article (23) 
In the event of a collision accident involving oil tankers, marine means, installations or carriers 
of hazardous substances, whether by deliberate action from the officer in charge of the marine 
means or as a result of his fault or negligence or the fault or negligence of his assistants, the 
captain shall be responsible for the operations to stop the spillage and the owner and 
transporter jointly responsible for the payment of all costs of damages, compensation and 
control incurred as a result of spillage into the marine environment, coastal areas and 
beaches. 
  
Article (24) 
1. The owner, captain or any person in charge of the marine means of transportation, the 
persons responsible for the transportation of oil located within the seaports or the marine 
envirorment of the State and the officials of parties involved in oil extraction, shall 
immediately and in accordance with the procedures stipulated in the Executive Order, inform 
the Ports Authorities, Coast Guards and other Competent Authorities of any oil spillage 
accident and circumstances of the accident, the nature of the leaking substance and actions 
taken to stop or control the leakage. 
2. In all cases, the Ports Authority and Coast Guards shall immediately inform the Agency and 
the Concerned Parties and provide complete information about the accident. 
  
 
 
 


--- PAGE 15 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
15
 
 
Article (25) 
The owner or captain of any marine means transporting oil and entering the marine 
environment of the State shall maintain in that means a record of all operations pertaining to 
oil. The Executive Order shall determine the nature of information in such record. 
  
Article (26) 
Marine means transporting oil and entering the marine environment of the State shall be 
equipped with the necessary equipment to undertake combating operations during the 
occurrence of pollution from the same marine means in accordance with the terms of the 
Executive Order. 
  
Article (27) 
Marine means transporting hazardous substances are prohibited from discharging or 
disposing harmful substances or wastes, directly or indirectly into the marine environment. 
Marine means transporting hazardous substances in containers, freight containers, mobile 
tankers or tanker railway vehicles are also prohibited from disposing such substances by 
dumping into the marine environment of the State. 
  
Article (28) 
Marine means, carrying hazardous substances, shall be provided with logbook in which the 
captain or officer in charge of the marine means shall enter all operations related to the cargo. 
The Executive Order shall determine the principles regulating such a record. 
  
Article (29) 
The captain of the marine means entering the seaports of the State shall notify of hazardous 
substances on board the marine means according to the type, quantity, location in the marine 
means, shipment origin and unloading destinations of such substances. 
  
 


--- PAGE 16 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
16
 
 
Article (30) 
The captain or officer in charge of the marine means shall take the necessary measures for 
protection against the effects of pollution in the case of occurrence of an accident to any 
marine means carrying harmful or hazardous substances which may pollute the marine 
environment and shall in this case implement orders of the administrative parties inspectors 
or, in this case, the judicial officers. 
  
Article (31) 
Marine means carrying harmful substances are prohibited from dumping hazardous wastes 
and polluting materials into the marine environment. 
The Concerned Parties in coordination with the Agency shall issue lists of hazardous wastes 
and polluting materials referred to in the previous paragraph. 
  
Article (32) 
Marine means and marine establishments identified in the Executive Order are prohibited 
from draining sewage water into the marine environment and such water shall be disposed 
of according to the standards and regulations specified in the Executive Order. 
Marine means are also prohibited from deporting wastes into the marine environment. 
  
Article (33) 
Marine means transporting oil and entering the marine environment shall be in possession of 
a valid International Oil Pollution Prevention Certificate (I.O.P.P) accompanied by a statement 
showing the last location of unloading of sludge and their quantities and date of unloading. 
  
Article (34) 
Marine means and marine establishments undertaking prospecting for exploring and 
exploiting natural and mineral resources in the marine environment and marine means using 
the seaports of the State shall not throw garbage or wastes in the marine environment and 
should deliver their garbage and wastes to the sites according to the conditions specified by 


--- PAGE 17 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
17
 
 
the Competent Authorities. The Competent Authorities of the seaports in cooperation with 
Coast Guards shall prepare and implement the plans for handling garbage or wastes and 
ensure that all marine means using the seaports of the State abide by the regulations 
stipulated in this Law and its Executive Order. 
  
Part Two 
Pollution from Land Sources 
Article (35) 
All establishments including public premises or commercial, industrial, agricultural, tourism 
and service establishments are prohibited from discarding untreated substances, wastes or 
liquids which may directly or indirectly cause pollution to the water environment. 
  
Article (36) 
Licensing for the establishment of premises or shops on or near the coastline discharging 
pollutants in contradiction to the terms of this Law and its Executive Order, is subject to 
conducting studies on environmental impact by the applicant and providing waste treatment 
units and undertake to start their operation immediately. 
  
Article (37) 
The Executive Order shall determine the specifications and standards to be observed by 
industrial establishments authorized to discharge degradable polluting substances after 
treatment. 
The Executive Order shall also specify persistent polluting substances that industrial 
establishments are prohibited to discharge into the marine environment. 
  
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 18 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
18
 
 
Article (38) 
The Agency and Competent Authority shall have the right to take specimens from treated 
liquid wastes in accordance with the procedures specified by the Executive Order to ensure 
that test results correspond with test approved standards. 
  
Chapter Three 
Protection of Drinking and Underground Water 
Article (39) 
The Concerned Parties shall consult and coordinate with the Agency and the Competent 
Authorities in all matters related to drinking and underground water including the 
preservation and development of the sources of water resources. 
  
Article (40) 
The Competent Authorities, in coordination with the Agency, shall determine the safety rules 
for water tanks and drinking water connections and their suitability for human consumption 
with which the owners of buildings and establishments shall comply and in accordance with 
the standards specified by the Executive Order. 
  
Article (41) 
The Competent Authorities, in coordination with the Agency shall conduct periodical annual 
examinations of water tanks and drinking water connections to ensure their safety and 
suitability for human consumption and inform the owner about procedures to be followed 
for water to reach the residents safely. 
In case the owner does not abide by such instructions, these authorities may undertake the 
necessary repairs at the expense of the owner. 
The results of periodical examinations shall be recorded in special registers by these 
authorities. 
  
 


--- PAGE 19 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
19
 
 
Section Three 
Soil Protection 
Article (42) 
The Competent Authorities shall take into consideration the environmental standards and 
factors specified by the Agency in coordination with the Competent Authorities and the 
Concerned Parties at the preparation and implementation of the plans for land-utilization for 
construction, agricultural, industrial areas, reserve areas and others. 
  
Article (43) 
It is prohibited in accordance with the Executive Order to undertake any activity contributing 
directly or indirectly, to damaging, disturbing the natural properties or polluting the soil in any 
way that may affect its productivity. 
  
Article (44) 
The Competent Authorities in coordination and cooperation with the Agency, and Concerned 
Parties shall encourage efforts to develop and enhance reserves of the desert environment 
and attend to biological diversity and increasing the green area by using modern methods and 
technologies and make use of advanced technology that protects and develops agricultural 
areas. It is prohibited to undertake any activity that damages the quantity or quality of flora in 
any area, thus causing desertification or deformation of the natural environment and it is 
prohibited to cut, uproot or cause damage to any tree, shrub or grass without authorization 
from the Competent Authority, in coordination with the Agency. 
  
Article (45) 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries in coordination with the Competent Authorities, the 
Agency and other Concerned Parties in the State, shall establish regulatory orders for the 
following: 
1. Types of pesticides, fertilizers and agricultural conditioners that may be produced, 
manufactured, imported, handled or used in the State. 


--- PAGE 20 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
20
 
 
2. Conditions and specifications for the production, manufacture, importation, handling or 
use of these substances. 
3. Procedures for registration and renewal of registration of these substances. 
4. Conditions and specifications for sampling and methods of analysis and assessment of the 
results of analysis of these substances. 
5. Methods for monitoring, assessment and treatment of pollution resulting from unsafe or 
incorrect handling or use of these substances. 
  
Article (46) 
The Agency shall in coordination with the Competent Authorities and Concerned Parties in 
the State, establish the controls and permissible limits of pesticides residues allowed on 
locally produced or imported foods. 
  
Article (47) 
The Agency shall in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, the 
Competent Authorities and other Concerned Parties, establish controls and conditions to be 
followed for the disposal of pesticide wastes or chemical compounds used in their 
manufacture or the compounds which were expired. 
  
Section Four 
Protection of Air from Pollution 
Article (48) 
Establishments, in practicing their activities, shall ensure that air pollutants must not exceed 
the acceptable permissible limits specified in the Executive Order. 
  
Article (49) 
Machines, engines or vehicles producing exhaust gases that exceed the limits specified in the 
Executive Order shall not be used. 
  


--- PAGE 21 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
21
 
 
Article (50) 
It is prohibited to throw, treat or bum garbage and solid wastes except in places designated 
for such purposes away from residential, industrial and agricultural areas and the water 
environment. The Executive Order shall determine the specifications, regulations and 
minimum distance of the designated places from such areas. 
  
Article (51) 
It is prohibited to spray or use pesticides or any other chemical compounds for agriculture, 
public health requirements or other purposes except after satisfying the conditions, controls 
and safeguares specified in the Executive Order to avoid the direct or indirect, immediate or 
late exposure of human, animal, plant, water courses or any other components of the 
environment to the harmful effects of such pesticides or chemical compounds. 
  
Article )52 ( 
All parties and individuals shall, at the time of exploration, drilling, construction, demolition 
or transportation of wastes or dusts produced as a result, during these activities, undertake 
the necessary precautions in addition to the precautions required for storage or safe 
transportation to prevent dispersion of such wastes and dusts as specified in the Executive 
Order. 
  
Article (53) 
The emission of smoke, vapors and fumes resulting from burning of fuels or other substances 
at the time of exploration, drilling, extraction and production of crude oil, industry, generation 
of power, construction or any other commercial purpose shall be within the permissible limits, 
and the person in charge of such activity shall take the necessary precautions to reduce the 
amount of pollutants in combustion emissions and keep a registry in which measurements of 
the amounts of pollutants resulting from such combustion are recorded. 
The Executive Order shall specify the precautions and permissible limits for chimneys and 
other means of controlling smoke, gases and vapors emitted as a result of combustion, 
permissible limits for measuring the amounts of pollutants resulting from combustion and 


--- PAGE 22 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
22
 
 
the parties authorized to audit the recorded measurements. 
  
Article (54) 
All parties and individuals undertaking the production or service or other activities specially 
when operating machines, equipments, warning devices and loud-speakers, shall not exceed 
the permissible limits for noise. 
The Executive Order shall indicate the permissible limits for the intensity and exposure time 
of noise. 
  
Article (55) 
Enterprises and establishments shall ensure adequate ventilation in the work place and take 
the necessary precautions and measures to prevent the leakage or emission of air pollutants 
unless it is within the permissible limits specified in the Executive Order no matter whether 
the leakage is resulting from the normal practices of these establishments or malfunction in 
the equipments. Such enterprises and establishments shall also provide the necessary means 
of protection to the workers in accordance with conditions of safety and occupational health 
including choice of machines, equipments and suitable types of fuel, taking into consideration 
the time of exposure to such pollutants. 
  
Article (56) 
Closed and semi-closed public places shall nave sufficient means of ventilation proportionate 
to the size and capacity of the place and type of activity to ensure the circulation, cleanliness 
and adequate temperature of the air. 
  
Article (57) 
Public and tourism establishments shall undertaface the necessary measures to prohibit 
smoking in closed public places except within the limits allowed in the license issued to such 
establishments. A special area shall be allocated to smokers in a way not to affect the air in 
other places. Smoking shall also be prohibited in public means of transportation and 
elevators. 


--- PAGE 23 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
23
 
 
  
Section Five 
Handling of Hazardous Substances and Hazardous Wastes and Medical 
Wastes 
Article (58) 
Handling or dealing with hazardous substances, hazardous wastes and medical wastes is 
prohibited without license from the Competent Authorities. The Executive Order shall specify 
the conditions and regulations for license issuance. 
  
Article (59) 
Disposal of hazardous wastes and medical wastes shall be undertaken in accordance with the 
conditions and criteria specified by the Executive Order. It is prohibited to establish any 
facilities for the treatment of hazardous wastes without a license issued by the Competent 
Authorities. 
  
Article (60) 
Inspection of the transportation and disposal of hazardous wastes across land and marine 
environment water boundaries and air shall be undertaken in accordance with the controls 
stipulated in the Executive Order. 
  
Article (61) 
Persons in charge of the production or handling of hazardous substances, whether in gas, 
liquid or solid states, shall take all the necessary precautions to ensure that no damage to the 
environment occurs. The Executive Order shall stipulate such precautions. 
The owner of the establishment undertaking activities resulting in the production of 
hazardous wastes according to this Law, shall keep a registry for such hazardous wastes, 
methods of disposal and the parties contracted to receive such wastes. The Executive Order 
shall indicate the information and the party authorized to review the registry to ensure that 
the information conforms with applied practices. 


--- PAGE 24 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
24
 
 
  
Article (62) 
1. No public or private party or qualified or unqualified persons are allowed to import or bring, 
bury or dispose of hazardous wastes in any form in the environment of the State. 
2. Such parties or persons are not allowed to import or bring nuclear substances or wastes or 
bury, dump, store or dispose of such wastes in any form in the environment of the State. 
3. No means of marine, air or land transportation carrying hazardous or nuclear wastes in the 
marine, air or land environment are allowed to pass without a written permit from the Agency. 
  
Section Six Natural Reserves 
Article (63) 
Reserve areas in the State and the boundaries of each area shall be determined by a decree 
issued by the Cabinet of Ministers or the Competent Authorities. Certain areas may be 
considered reserve areas in accordance with a proposal from the Agency. 
  
Article (64) 
Works, activities and acts prohibited in reserve areas which may lead to damage or 
deterioration of the natural environment, cause harm to wild or marine life or affect their 
aesthetic value, shall be determined by a decree issued by the Competent Authorities in 
coordination with the Agency. The following shall be particularly prohibited: 
1. Hunting, transporting, killing or harming wild and marine creatures or undertaking 
activities leading to their eradication. 
2. Damaging or destroying geological or geographical formations or areas considered natural 
habitat to animal and plant species as a result of increase or growth of such species. 
3. Introducing foreign species into the reserve. 
4. Polluting the soil, water or air of the reserve. 
5. Military maneuvers and shooting practices. 
6. Cutting trees or eroding soil. 
7. Amusements, recreation and sports functions which can kill or harm or have negative 
impact on natural life. 


--- PAGE 25 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
25
 
 
8. All that can disturb the natural balance of such reserves. 
It is also prohibited to set up establishments, buildings or construct roads, drive vehicles or 
practice any agricultural, industrial or commercial activities in reserve areas without the 
permission of the Competent Authorities. 
  
Article (65) 
Wild and marine animals and birds using reserves for resting, hatching or habitation, shall be 
protected in accordance with the provisions of this Law. 
  
Article (66) 
It is prohibited to practice any activities, acts or' works in areas surrounding the reserves if 
such practices affect the environment of the reserves or their natural phenomena, without 
permission from the Competent Authorities in consultation with the Agency. The Executive 
Order shall specify the bases for determining the surrounding areas. 
  
Article (67) 
The Agency shall, in coordination with tie Competent Authorities, undertake to supervise the 
activities required for the maintenance of reserves in the State and shall particularly 
undertake the Allowing: 
1. Contributing to the preparation of programmes and studies needed for the development of 
the reserves. 
2. Establishment of the standards and controls for monitoring environmental phenomena and 
confining and registering land and marine creatures in the reserves. 
3. Coordination of activities for the management and development of the reserves. 
4. Informing and educating the public about the objectives and purposes of the establishment 
of natural reserves. 
5. Exchange of information and experience in this field with other countries, international 
organizations and Concerned Parties in the State. 
Article )68 ( 
Research centers, scientific institutions, universities and other specialized parties shall, in 


--- PAGE 26 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
26
 
 
coordination with the Agency take interest in the issues of biological diversity, preservation 
of the indigenous of species, conducting studies and research and proposing the controls and 
procedures to be followed for the preservation and investment in such species without 
leading to their depletion and protecting the moral, social and economic lawful rights of the 
State. 
  
Section seven 
Liability and Compensation for Environmental Damages 
Chapter One 
Judicial Control Authorities 
Article (69) 
The Minister of Justice, Islamic Affairs and Awqaf, in agreement with the Minister of Health 
shall issue a resolution determining the employees of the Agency and the Competent 
Authorities, whose incumbents shall have judicial control powers for the inspection of 
establishments and other places to verify their compliance with the application of the 
provisions of this Law and resolutions issued for its enforcement. 
And employees of the Agency and the Competent Authorities so determined shall be entitled 
to control any violation of the provisions of this Law, and refer the violating party to the 
Competent Judicial Authorities in accordance with the procedures applied in the State. 
  
Article (70) 
If the captain or the person in charge of a violating marine means of transportation wishes to 
leave the seaport urgently, the Judicial control officer shall collect an immediate fine on 
temporary basis for the account of enforcement of fine or compensation penalty, charged 
within the limits stipulated in this Law, provided that the fine stall not be less than the 
specified minimum penalty, in addition to all expanses and compensations determined by the 
Competent Authorities in agreement with the Agency for the removal of the effects of the 
violation. 
A bank letter of guarantee for the above amount may be accepted by the Competent 


--- PAGE 27 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
27
 
 
Authorities. 
  
Chapter Two 
Liability and Compensation for Environmental Damages 
Article (71) 
Any person who, intentionally or by way of negligence causes damage to the environment or 
others as a result of violation of the provisions stated in this Law or the orders or resolutions 
issued for its enforcement, shall be held responsible for all the costs of treatment or removal 
of such damages and any compensation incurred as a result. 
  
Article (72) 
The compensation for the environmental damage referred to under Article (71) of this Law, 
shall include the damages which affect the environment in such a way that prevents or 
reduces temporary or permanent lawful use or damages the economic and aesthetic value as 
well as the cost of the environmental rehabilitation. 
  
Section Eight 
Penalities 
Article (73) 
Any person who violates the provisions of Articles (21), (27), (31), (62/1) and (62/3) of this 
Law, shall be punished by imprisonment and fine not less than One Hundred and Fifty 
Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 150,000) and not exceeding One Million Dirhams (Dh. 1,000,000). 
And, punishment by death or life imprisonment and fine not less than One Million Dirhams 
(Dh. 1,000,000) and not exceeding Ten Million Dirhams (Dh. 10,000,000) for any person 
who violates the provisions of Article (62/2) of this Law. 
And, any person who violates clauses (1) and (2) of Article (62) shall re-­export the hazardous 
and nuclear wastes, subject of the criminal act, at his own expense. 
And, punishment by imprisonment for a period not less than two years and not exceeding five 
years, and fine not less than Two Hundred Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 200,000) and not 


--- PAGE 28 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
28
 
 
exceeding Five Hundred Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 500,000) or either of the two penalities, for 
any person who violates the provisions of Articles (18) and (58) of this Law. 
And, punishment by imprisonment and fine or either of the two penalties, if the acts of crime 
referred to under Article (21) concern fishing boats not exceeding seventy feet in length. 
  
Artilce )74 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Articles (24) and (26) of this Law, shall be punished 
by imprisonment for a period not less than one year and fine not less than a Hundred 
Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 100,000) and not exceeding Five Hundred Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 
500,000). 
  
Article )75 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Articles (25), (28), (32), (33) and (34) of this law, 
shall be punished by imprisonment for a period not less than one year and not exceeding two 
years and fine not less than Ten Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 10,000) and not exceeding Two 
Hundred Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 200,000) or either of the two penalties. 
  
Article )76 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Articles (22) and (30) of this Law, shall be punished 
by imprisonment for a period not less than six months and not exceeding one year and a fine 
not less than Two Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 2000) and not exceeding Ten Thousand Dirhams 
(Dh. 10,000) or either of the two penalties. 
  
Article )77 ( 
Any person, who causes pollution of drinking water or ground water, shall be punished by 
imprisonment for a period not less than one year and fine not less than Five Thousand 
Dirhams (Dh. 5000) and not exceeding Hundred Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 100,000). 
  
 


--- PAGE 29 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
29
 
 
Article )78 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Articles (59), (60) and (61) of this Law, shall be 
punished by imprisonment for a period not less than one year and a fine not less than Ten 
Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 10,000) and not exceeding Twenty Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 20,000) 
or either of the two penalties. 
  
Article )79 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (49) of this Law, shall be punished by fine 
not less than One Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 1000). 
  
Article )80 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (51) of this Law, shall be punished by fine 
not less than Ten Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 10,000) and not exceeding Fifty Thousand Dirhams 
(Dh. 50,000). 
  
Article )81 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (35) of this Law, shall be punished by fine 
not less than Ten Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 10,000) and not exceeding Hundred Thousand 
Dirhams (Dh. 100,000). 
  
Article )82 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Articles (48), (50), ((53), (54) and (55) of this Law, 
shall be punished by fine not less than Two Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 2000) and not exceeding 
Twenty Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 20,000). 
  
Article )83 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (12) of this Law, shall be punished by 
imprisonment and fine not less than Two Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 2000) and not exceeding 
Twenty Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 20,000) or either of the two penalties and the confiscation 
of the captured birds and animals. 


--- PAGE 30 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
30
 
 
Article )83 ( 
In addition to the seizure of captured birds and animals, any person who violates the 
provisions of Article (12) and clause (1) of Article (64) of this law shall be punished by: 
1. Imprisonment for a period of no less than six months and a fine of no less than twenty 
thousand Dirhams if the crime involves any of the species included in the first list attached 
hereto. 
2. Imprisonment for a period of no less than three months and a fine of no less than ten 
thousand Dirhams or either punishment if the crime involves any of the species included in 
the second list attached hereto. 
3. Imprisonment for a period of no less than one month and a fine of no less than five 
thousand Dirhams or either punishment if the crime involves any of the species included in 
the third list attached hereto. 
  
Article )84 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (43) of this Law, shall be punished by fine 
not less than One Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 1000) and not exceeding Twenty Thousand 
Dirhams (Dh. 20,000). 
  
Article )85 ( 
Any person who violates the provisions of Article (66) of this Law, shall be punished by fine 
not less than Five Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 5000) and not exceeding Twenty Thousand 
Dirhams (Dh. 20,000). 
  
Article )86 ( 
Violation of any other provisions of this Law, shall be punishable by fine not less than Five 
Hundred Dirhams (Dh. 500) and not exceeding Ten Thousand Dirhams (Dh. 10,000). 
  
Article )87 ( 
The application of the penalties stipulated in this Law shall not contravene any more severe 


--- PAGE 31 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
31
 
 
penalties stipulated in another Law. 
  
Article )88 ( 
In the event of repetition of the crimes stipulated in this Law, the penalties determined for 
such crimes shall be doubled. 
  
Article )89 ( 
The penalties stipulated in this Law shall not be applied in the event of pollution resulting 
from: 
1. Securing the safety of the marine means of transportation or safety of lives onboard. 
2. Unloading as a result of damage to the marine means of transportation or any of its 
equipments provided that such damage did not occur with the knowledge of the captain or 
the person in charge and was not intentional or a result of negligence and provided that in 
any case the captain or person in charge of the means shall take all precautions for preventing 
or reducing the effects of pollution, before and after the occurrence of the damage and inform 
the ports authorities immediately. 
3. A sudden break in a pipeline carrying oil or oil mixture, during working operations, drilling, 
exploration or testing of wells, and not resulting from negligence in the monitoring or 
maintenance of the lines, and provided that sufficient precautions to monitor operations of 
the lines and immediately control pollution and its source. 
  
Article )90 ( 
The court located in the area where the crime occurred, shall decide on all crimes stipulated 
in this Law, if the crime occurred in a marine means of transportation of any nationality or 
kind within the marine environment of the State and the court shall quickly decide on the 
case. 
Criminal courts of the capital shall decide on crimes committed by marine means of 
transportation raising the flag of the State outside the marine environment of the State. 
 


--- PAGE 32 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
32
 
 
Section Nine 
Final Provisions 
Article (91) 
The level of nuclear activity or concentration of radioactive materials in air, water, food and 
soil, shall not exceed the permissible limits determined by the Concerned Parties in 
consultation and coordination with the Agency and as stated in the Executive Order. 
  
Article (92) 
The Agency shall be entitled to request the assistance of the Seaports Authorities, Armed 
Forces, Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources or any other Party, 
in order to implement the provisions of this law, and such parties shall whenever requested, 
provide support as soon as possible. 
  
Article (93) 
The Agency shall provide other Parties with all available information and statements on 
recent and important environmental regulations concerning the activities of such Parties 
according to the priorities determined by the board of directors. 
  
Article (94) 
The provisions of Articles (4), (6), (7), (38) and (58) of this law, shall not be applicable to the 
activities of parties applying integrated systems and programmes for the protection and 
development of the environment and sufficient to achieve the objectives of this Law. 
Such Parties shall be exempted from referring back to the Agency when issuing licenses for 
establishments and activities subject to its authority or supervision. 
The Board of Directors shall issue a decree determining the authority and the adequacy of the 
system or programme. 
Article (95) 
The Cabinet of Ministers shall, after the approval of the Board of Directors reached in 
coordination with the Competent Authorities, issue a decree fixing the fees required for the 


--- PAGE 33 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
33
 
 
activities, procedures and licenses granted under the provisions of this Law. 
  
Article (96) 
The Agency shall, in coordination with the Competent Authorities, establish a system of 
incentives awarded to organizations, agencies, establishments and individuals undertaking 
jobs or projects for the protection and development of the environment in the State, and the 
system shall be issued by a decree from the Board of Directors. 
  
Article (97) 
The owners of projects and establishments existing on the date of operation of this law and 
determined by the Executive Order, shall provide the Agency within a period not exceeding 
one year from the operation of the Executive Order, with a complete statement of their 
activities. The statement shall include their suggestions concerning precautiors and measures 
to be taken so that the operations of the project or establishment meet the required 
environmental standards. 
The Agency shall determine within a period net exceeding six months, the precautions and 
measures to be taken by the owner of the project or establishment. 
  
Article (98) 
Projects and establishments existing on the dale of operation of this Law, shall amend their 
status according to its provisions and the provisions of the Executive Order within a period 
not exceeding one year from the date of operation of the Executive Order. 
The Board of Directors may extend this period for another year if need so requires or if the 
extension has justification acceptable to the Board. 
Any expansions or renovations in the existing establishment shall be subject to the provisions 
stipulated in this Law. 
  
Article (99) 
The Cabinet of Ministers, in consultation and coordination with the Competent Authorities, 
shall issue the Executive Order of this Law. 


--- PAGE 34 ---

 
Federal Law No. (24) of 1999 Concerning the Protection and Development of the Environment 
34
 
 
  
Article (100) 
Any other provisions that may contradict or contravene this Law shall be superseded. 
  
Article (101) 
This Law shall be published in the official gazette and shall come into force after three months 
of its publication. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zayed Bin Sultan Al Nahyan 
President of the United Arab Emirates 
 
Passed by us in the presidential palace in Abu Dhabi, 
On: 8 / Rajab / 1420 AH. 
Corresponding to: 17 October 1999. 
 


--- PAGE 35 ---

 
 
 
Annex 1 Appendix I 
Scientific Name 
 
Common Name 
 
Arabic Name 
 
(Mammals) 
 
Lepus capensis 
 
Cape Hare 
 
 
Gazella subgutturosa 
 
Goitred (Sand) Gazelle 
 
 
Gazella gazelle cora 
 
Arabian gazelle (Edmi) 
 
 
Oryx leucoryx 
 
Arabian Oryx 
 
 
Hemitragus jayakari 
 
Arabian Tahr 
 
 
Caracal caracal 
 
Caracal 
 
 
Panthera pardus nimr 
 
Arabian Leopard 
 
 
(Birds) 
 
Falco cherrug 
 
Saker Falcon 
 
 
Peregrine Falcon 
 
Falco peregrinus 
 
 
Chlamydotis macqueeni 
 
Houbara Bustard 
 
 
Cursorius cursor 
 
Cream coloured Courser 
 
 


--- PAGE 36 ---

 
 
 
Pterocles exustus 
 
Chestnut-bellied 
Sandgrouse 
 
 
(Reptiles) 
 
caretta Caretta 
 
Turtle Loggerhead 
 
 
mydus Chelonia 
 
Green turtles 
 
 
imbricata Eretmochelys 
 
Turtle Hawksbill 
 
 
coriacea Dermochelys 
 
leatherback 
 
 
  
Annex 2 Appendix II 
Scientific Name 
 
Common Name 
 
Arabic Name 
 
(Mammals) 
 
Paraechinus aethiopicus 
 
Desert Hedgehog 
 
  
 
Hemiechinus 
hypomelas 
 
Brandt's Hedgehog 
 
  
 
Procavia capensis 
 
Rock Hyrax 
 
  
 
Vulpes vulpes 
 
Red Fox 
 
  
 
Canis lupus 
Wolf 
  


--- PAGE 37 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Vulpes rueppelli 
 
Sand Fox 
 
  
 
Hyaena hyaena 
 
Striped Hyena 
 
  
 
Felis silvestris gordoni 
 
Gordon's Wild Cat 
 
  
 
Felis margarita 
 
Sand cat 
 
  
 
Mellivora capensis 
 
Honey Badger 
 
  
 
Ichneumia albicauda 
 
White-tailed Mongoose 
 
  
 
Vulpes cana 
 
Blanford's Fox 
 
  
 
(Birds) 
 
Podiceps cristatus 
 
Great Crested Grebe 
 
  
 
Podiceps nigricollis 
 
Black necked Grebe 
 
  
 
Puffinus griseus 
 
Sooty Shearwater 
 
  
 
Oceanites oceanicus 
 
Wilson's Storm Petrel 
 
  
 
Oceanodroma lecorhoa 
 
Leach's Storm Petrel 
 
  
 
Sula dactylatra 
 
Masked Booby 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 38 ---

 
 
 
Sula sula 
 
Red-footed Booby 
 
  
 
Sula leucogaster 
 
Brown Booby 
 
  
 
Phalacrocorax carbo 
 
Great Cormorant 
 
  
 
Botaurus stellaris 
 
Bittern 
 
  
 
Ixobrychus minutus 
 
Little Bittern 
 
  
 
Ixobrychus 
cinnamomeus 
 
Cinnamon Bittern 
 
  
 
Nycticorax nycticorax 
 
Night Heron 
 
  
 
Butorides striatus 
 
Striated Heron 
 
  
 
Ardeola ralloides 
 
Squacco Heron 
 
  
 
Egretta gularis 
 
Western Reef Heron 
 
  
 
Egretta alba 
 
Great Egret 
 
  
 
Ardea cinerea 
 
Grey Heron 
 
  
 
Ardea purpurea 
 
Purple Heron 
 
  
 
Ciconia nigra 
 
Black Stork 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 39 ---

 
 
 
Ciconia ciconia 
 
White Stork 
 
  
 
Plegadis falcinellus 
 
Glossy Ibis 
 
  
 
Platalea leucorodia 
 
Spoonbill 
 
  
 
Cygnus olor 
 
Mute Swan 
 
  
 
Cygnus columbianus 
 
Bewick's Swan 
 
  
 
Cygnus cygnus 
 
Whooper Swan 
 
  
 
Anser albifrons 
 
White-fronted Goose 
 
  
 
Anser anser 
 
Greylag Goose 
 
  
 
Tadorna ferruginea 
 
Ruddy Shelduck 
 
  
 
Tadorna tadorna 
 
Shelduck 
 
  
 
Anas penelope 
 
Wigeon 
 
  
 
Anas strepera 
 
Gadwall 
 
  
 
Anas crecca 
 
Teal 
 
  
 
Anas platyrhynchos 
 
Mallard 
 
  
 
Anas acuta 
Pintail 
  


--- PAGE 40 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Anas clypeata 
 
Shoveler 
 
  
 
Netta rufina 
 
Red-crested Pochard 
 
  
 
Aythya ferina 
 
Pochard 
 
  
 
Aythya fuligula 
 
Tufted Duck 
 
  
 
Mergus serrator 
 
Red-breasted Merganser 
 
  
 
Pernis ptilorhyncus 
 
Crested Honey Buzzard 
 
  
 
Elanus caeruleus 
 
Black-shouldered Kite 
 
  
 
Milvus migrans 
 
Black Kite 
 
  
 
Haliaeetus lecoryphus 
 
Pallas's Fish Eagle 
 
  
 
Gyps fulvus 
 
Griffon Vulture 
 
  
 
Circaetus gallicus 
 
Short toed Eagle 
 
  
 
Circus aeruginosus 
 
Marsh Harrier 
 
  
 
Circus cyaneus 
 
Hen Harrier 
 
  
 
Circus pygargus 
 
Montagu's Harrier 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 41 ---

 
 
 
Accipiter gentilis 
 
Goshawk 
 
  
 
Accipiter nisus 
 
Sparrowhawk 
 
  
 
Accipiter nisus 
 
Levant Sparrowhawk 
 
  
 
Accipiter badius 
 
Shikra 
 
  
 
Butastur teesa 
 
White-eyed Buzzard 
 
  
 
Buteo buteo vulpinus 
 
Steppe Buzzard 
 
  
 
Buteo rufinus 
 
Long-legged Buzzard 
 
  
 
Aquila pomarina 
 
Lesser Spotted Eagle 
 
  
 
Aquila nipalensis 
 
Steppe Eagle 
 
  
 
Aquila chrysaetos 
 
Golden Eagle 
 
  
 
Hieraaetus pennatus 
 
Booted Eagle 
 
  
 
Hieraaetus fasciatus 
 
Bonelli's Eagle 
 
  
 
Falco tinnunculus 
 
Kestrel 
 
  
 
Falco amurensis 
 
Amur Falcon 
 
  
 
Falco columbarius 
Merlin 
  


--- PAGE 42 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Falco subbuteo 
 
Hobby 
 
  
 
Falco biarmicus 
 
Lanner Falcon 
 
  
 
Falco pelegrinoides 
 
Barbary Falcon 
 
  
 
Alectoris chukar 
 
Chukar 
 
  
 
Ammoperdix heyi 
 
Sand Partridge 
 
  
 
Francolinus francolinus 
 
Black Francolin 
 
  
 
Francolinus 
pondicerianus 
 
Grey Francolin 
 
  
 
Coturnix coturnix 
 
Quail 
 
  
 
Rallus aquaticus 
 
Water Rail 
 
  
 
Porzana porzana 
 
Spotted Crake 
 
  
 
Porzana parva 
 
Little Crake 
 
  
 
Porzana pusilla 
 
Baillon's Crake 
 
  
 
Porphyrio porphyrio 
 
Purple Gallinule 
 
  
 
Fulica atra 
Coot 
  


--- PAGE 43 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fulica cristata 
 
Red-knobbed Coot 
 
  
 
Grus grus 
 
Common Crane 
 
  
 
Haematopus ostralegus 
 
Oystercatcher 
 
  
 
Recurvirostra avosetta 
 
Avocet 
 
  
 
Burhinus oedicnemus 
 
Stone Curlew 
 
  
 
Glareola pratincola 
 
Collared Pratincole 
 
  
 
Glareola maldivarum 
 
Oriental Pratincole 
 
  
 
Glareola nordmanni 
 
Black-winged Pratincole 
 
  
 
Glareola lactea 
 
Little Pratincole 
 
  
 
Charadrius dubius 
 
Little Ringed Plover 
 
  
 
Charadrius hiaticula 
 
Ringed Plover 
 
  
 
Charadrius pecuarius 
 
Kittlitz's Plover 
 
  
 
Charadrius mongolus 
 
Lesser Sand Plover 
 
  
 
Charadrius leschenaultii 
 
Greater Sand Plover 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 44 ---

 
 
 
Charadrius asiaticus 
 
Caspian Plover 
 
  
 
Eudromias morinellus 
 
Dotterel 
 
  
 
Pluvialis fulva 
 
Pacific Golden Plover 
 
  
 
Pluvialis apricaria 
 
Golden Plover 
 
  
 
Pluvialis squatarola 
 
Grey Plover 
 
  
 
Vanellus leucurus 
 
White-tailed Plover 
 
  
 
Vanellus vanellus 
 
Lapwing 
 
  
 
Calidris tenuirostris 
 
Great Knot 
 
  
 
Calidris canutus 
 
Red Knot 
 
  
 
Calidris alba 
 
Sanderling 
 
  
 
Calidris ruficollis 
 
Red-necked Stint 
 
  
 
Calidris minuta 
 
Little Stint 
 
  
 
Calidris temminckii 
 
Temminck's Stint 
 
  
 
Calidris subminuta 
 
Long toed Stint 
 
  
 
Calidris ferruginea 
Curlew Sandpiper 
  


--- PAGE 45 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Calidris alpina 
 
Dunlin 
 
  
 
Philomachus pugnax 
 
Ruff 
 
  
 
Lymnocryptes minimus 
 
Jack Snipe 
 
  
 
Gallinago gallinago 
 
Snipe 
 
  
 
Gallinago stenura 
 
Pintail Snipe 
 
  
 
Scolopax rusticola 
 
Woodcock 
 
  
 
Limosa limosa 
 
Black-tailed Godwit 
 
  
 
Limosa lapponica 
 
Bar-tailed Godwit 
 
  
 
Numenius phaeopus 
 
Whimbrel 
 
  
 
Numenius arquata 
 
Curlew 
 
  
 
Tringa erythropus 
 
Spotted Redshank 
 
  
 
Tringa totanus 
 
Redshank 
 
  
 
Tringa stagnatilis 
 
Marsh Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Tringa nebularia 
 
Greenshank 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 46 ---

 
 
 
Tringa ochropus 
 
Green Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Tringa glareola 
 
Wood Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Tringa cinerea 
 
Terek Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Tringa hypoleucos 
 
Common Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Arenaria interpres 
 
Turnstone 
 
  
 
Phalaropus lobatus 
 
Red-necked Phalarope 
 
  
 
Phalaropus fulicarius 
 
Grey Phalarope 
 
  
 
Stercorarius pomarinus 
 
Pomarine Skua 
 
  
 
Stercorarius parasiticus 
 
Arctic Skua 
 
  
 
Stercorarius 
longicaudus 
 
Long-tailed Skua 
 
  
 
Larus leucophthalmus 
 
White-eyed Gull 
 
  
 
Larus ichthyaetus 
 
Great Black-headed Gull 
 
  
 
Larus genei 
 
Slender-billed Gull 
 
  
 
Sterna caspia 
 
Caspian Tern 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 47 ---

 
 
 
Sterna sandvicensis 
 
Sandwich Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna albifrons 
 
Little Tern 
 
  
 
Chlidonias leucopterus 
 
White-winged Black Tern 
 
  
 
Tyto alba 
 
Barn Owl 
 
  
 
Otus brucei 
 
Striated Scops Owl 
 
  
 
Otus scops 
 
Scops Owl 
 
  
 
Athene noctua 
 
Little Owl 
 
  
 
Asio otus 
 
Long-eared Owl 
 
  
 
Asio flammeus 
 
Short-eared Owl 
 
  
 
Caprimulgus 
mahrattensis 
 
Syke's Nightjar 
 
  
 
Caprimulgus europaeus 
 
European Nightjar 
 
  
 
Caprimulgus aegyptius 
 
Egyptian Nightjar 
 
  
 
Calandrella rufescens 
 
Lesser Short-toed Lark 
 
  
 
Pycnonotus 
xanthopygos 
Yellow-vented Bulbul 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 48 ---

 
 
 
 
Hypocolius ampelinus 
 
Grey Hypocolius 
 
  
 
Irania gutturalis 
 
White-throated Robin 
 
  
 
Oenanthe finschii 
 
Finsch's Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe 
xanthoprymna 
 
Red-tailed Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe picata 
 
Eastern Pied Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe monacha 
 
Hooded Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe alboniger 
 
Hume's Wheatear 
 
  
 
Hippolais languida 
 
Upcher's Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia mystacea 
 
Menetries' Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia minula 
 
Desert Lesser Whitethroat 
 
  
 
Sylvia althaea 
 
Hume's Lesser 
Whitethroat 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus schwarzi 
 
Radde's Warbler 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus neglectus 
 
Plain Leaf Warbler 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 49 ---

 
 
 
Puffinus persicus 
 
Persian Shearwater 
 
  
 
Phaethon aethereus 
 
Red-billed Tropicbird 
 
  
 
Phalacrocorax 
nigrogularis 
 
Socotra Cormorant 
 
  
 
Pelecanus onocrotalus 
 
White Pelican 
 
  
 
Anser erythropus 
 
Lesser White-fronted 
Goose 
 
  
 
Anas querquedula 
 
Ferruginous Duck 
 
  
 
Marmaronetta 
angustirostris 
 
Marbled Teal 
 
  
 
Aythya nyroca 
 
Ferruginous Duck 
 
  
 
Pernis apivorus 
 
European Honey Buzzard 
 
  
 
Anthropoides virgo 
 
Demoiselle Crane 
 
  
 
Himantopus 
himantopus 
 
Black winged Stilt 
 
  
 
Dromas ardeola 
 
Crab Plover 
 
  
 
Charadrius alexandrinus 
Kentish Plover 
  


--- PAGE 50 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Vanellus gregarius 
 
Sociable Plover 
 
  
 
Limicola falcinellus 
 
Broad-billed Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Gallinago media 
 
Great Snipe 
 
  
 
Larus hemprichii 
 
Sooty Gull 
 
  
 
Sterna bergii 
 
Crested Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna bengalensis 
 
Lesser Crested Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna repressa 
 
White-cheeked Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna anaethetus 
 
Bridled Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna saundersi 
 
Saunders' Little Tern 
 
  
 
Halcyon chloris 
 
White-collared Kingfisher 
 
  
 
Coracias garrulus 
 
European Roller 
 
  
 
Hippolais caligata 
 
Booted Warbler 
 
  
 
Ficedula semitorquata 
 
Semi-collared Flycatcher 
 
  
 
Turdoides squamiceps 
 
Arabian Babbler 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 51 ---

 
 
 
Carpospiza 
brachydactyla 
 
Pale Rock Sparrow 
 
  
 
Emberiza cineracea 
 
Cinereous Bunting 
 
  
 
Crex crex 
 
Corn Crake 
 
  
 
Pelecanus crispus 
 
Dalmatian Pelican 
 
  
 
Phoenicopterus ruber 
 
Greater Flamingo 
 
  
 
Phoenicopterus ruber 
 
Lesser Flamingo 
 
  
 
Neophron percnopterus 
 
Egyptian Vulture 
 
  
 
Torgos tracheliotus 
 
Lappet faced Vulture 
 
  
 
Circus macrourus 
 
Pallid Harrier 
 
  
 
Aquila clanga 
 
Greater Spotted Eagle 
 
  
 
Aquila heliaca 
 
Imperial Eagle 
 
  
 
Pandion haliaetus 
 
Osprey 
 
  
 
Falco naumanni 
 
Lesser Kestrel 
 
  
 
Falco concolor 
 
Sooty Falcon 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 52 ---

 
 
 
Bubo bubo (ascalaphus) 
 
Desert Eagle Owl 
 
  
 
(Reptiles) 
 
Uromastyx aegyptia 
 
Spiny-tailed Lizard 
 
  
 
Varanus griseus 
 
Desert Monitor 
 
  
 
  
Annex 3 Appendix III 
Scientific Name 
 
Common Name 
 
Arabic Name 
 
(Mammals) 
 
Suncus etruscus 
 
Savi's Pigmy Shrew 
 
  
 
Rousettus aegyptiacus 
 
Egyptian Fruit Bat 
 
  
 
Rhinopoma 
muscatellum 
 
Muscat Mouse-tailed Bat 
 
  
 
Triaenops Persicus 
 
Persian Leaf-nosed Bat 
 
  
 
Jaculus jaculus 
 
Lesser Jerboa 
 
  
 
Acomys cahirinus 
 
Egyptian Spiny Mouse 
 
  
 
Meriones arimalius 
 
Arabian Jird 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 53 ---

 
 
 
(Birds) 
 
Tachybaptus ruficollis 
 
Little Grebe 
 
  
 
Ardeola grayii 
 
Indian Pond Heron 
 
  
 
Bubulcus ibis 
 
Cattle Egret 
 
  
 
Egretta garzetta 
 
Little Egret 
 
  
 
Egretta intermedia 
 
Intermediate Egret 
 
  
 
Alopochen aegyptiacus 
 
Egyptian Goose 
 
  
 
Nettapus 
coromandelianus 
 
Cotton Teal 
 
  
 
Amuarornis 
phoenicurus 
 
White-breasted Waterhen 
 
  
 
Gallinula chloropus 
 
Moorhen 
 
  
 
Vanellus indicus 
 
Red-wattled Lapwing 
 
  
 
Calidris melanotos 
 
Pectoral Sandpiper 
 
  
 
Larus melanocephalus 
 
Mediterranean Gull 
 
  
 
Larus minutus 
Little Gull 
  


--- PAGE 54 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Xema sabini 
 
Sabine's Gull 
 
  
 
Larus ridibundus 
 
Black-headed Gull 
 
  
 
Larus brunnicephalus 
 
Brown-headed Gull 
 
  
 
Larus canus 
 
Common Gull 
 
  
 
Larus fuscus 
 
Lesser Black-backed 
(Baltic) Gull 
 
  
 
Larus heuglini 
 
Siberian Gull 
 
  
 
Larus cachinnans 
 
Caspian Gull 
 
  
 
Rissa tridactyla 
 
Black-legged Kittiwake 
(Kittiwake) 
 
  
 
Gelochelidon nilotica 
 
Gull-billed Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna dougallii 
 
Roseate tern 
 
  
 
Sterna hirundo 
 
Common Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna paradisea 
 
Arctic Tern 
 
  
 
Sterna fuscata 
 
Sooty Tern 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 55 ---

 
 
 
Chlidonias hybridus 
 
Whiskered Tern 
 
  
 
Chlidonias niger 
 
Black Tern 
 
  
 
Anous tenuirostris 
 
Lesser Noddy 
 
  
 
Anous stolidus 
 
Common Noddy 
 
  
 
Pterocles lichtensteinii 
 
Lichtenstein's Sandgrouse 
 
  
 
Pterocles senegallus 
 
Spotted Sandgrouse 
 
  
 
Pterocles orientalis 
 
Black-bellied Sandgrouse 
 
  
 
Columba oenas 
 
Stock Dove 
 
  
 
Columba livia 
 
Rock Dove 
 
  
 
Columba palumbus 
 
Woodpigeon 
 
  
 
Streptopelia decaocto 
 
Collared Dove 
 
  
 
Streptopelia turtur 
 
Turtle Dove 
 
  
 
Streptopelia orientalis 
 
Oriental Turtle Dove 
 
  
 
Streptopelia 
senegalensis 
 
Laughing Dove 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 56 ---

 
 
 
Oena capensis 
 
Namaqua Dove 
 
  
 
Psittacula krameri 
 
Ring-necked Parakeet 
 
  
 
Psittacula eupatria 
 
Alexandrine Parakeet 
 
  
 
Cuculus canorus 
 
Cuckoo 
 
  
 
Eudynamys scolopacea 
 
Indian Koel 
 
  
 
Apus apus 
 
Common Swift 
 
  
 
Apus pallidus 
 
Pallid Swift 
 
  
 
Apus melba 
 
Alpine Swift 
 
  
 
Apus pacificus 
 
Pacific Swift 
 
  
 
Apus affinis 
 
Little Swift 
 
  
 
Halcyon smyrnensis 
 
White-breasted Kingfisher 
 
  
 
Halcyon leucocephala 
 
Grey-headed Kingfisher 
 
  
 
Alcedo atthis 
 
Kingfisher 
 
  
 
Ceryle rudis 
 
Pied Kingfisher 
 
  
 
Merops albicollis 
White-throated Bee-eater 
  


--- PAGE 57 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Merops orientalis 
 
Little Green Bee eater 
 
  
 
Merops persicus 
 
Blue cheeked Bee eater 
 
  
 
Merops apiaster 
 
European Bee eater 
 
  
 
Coracias benghalensis 
 
Indian Roller 
 
  
 
Upupa epops 
 
Hoopoe 
 
  
 
Jynx torquilla 
 
Wryneck 
 
  
 
Eremopterix nigriceps 
 
Black-crowned Finch Lark 
 
  
 
Eremalauda dunni 
 
Dunn's Lark 
 
  
 
Ammomanes cincturus 
 
Bar-Tailed Desert Lark 
 
  
 
Ammomanes deserti 
 
Desert Lark 
 
  
 
Alaemon alaudipes 
 
Hoopoe Lark 
 
  
 
Melanocorypha 
calandra 
 
Calandra Lark 
 
  
 
Melanocorypha 
bimaculata 
 
Bimaculated Lark 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 58 ---

 
 
 
Calandrella 
brachydactyla 
 
Short-toed lark 
 
  
 
Galerida cristata 
 
Crested Lark 
 
  
 
Alauda gulgula 
 
Oriental Skylark 
 
  
 
Alauda arvensis 
 
Skylark 
 
  
 
Eremophila bilopha 
 
Temminck's Horned Lark 
 
  
 
Riparia paludicola 
 
Brown-throated Martin 
 
  
 
Riparia riparia 
 
Sand Martin 
 
  
 
Riparia diluta 
 
Pale Martin 
 
  
 
Ptyonoprogne fuligula 
 
African Rock Martin 
 
  
 
Hirundo obsoleta 
 
Pale Crag Martin 
 
  
 
Hirundo rupestris 
 
Crag Martin 
 
  
 
Hirundo rustica 
 
Barn Swallow 
 
  
 
Hirundo smithii 
 
Wire-tailed Swallow 
 
  
 
Hirundo daurica 
 
Red-rumped Swallow 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 59 ---

 
 
 
Petrochelidon fluvicola 
 
Indian Cliff swallow 
 
  
 
Delichon urbica 
 
House Martin 
 
  
 
Delichon dasypus 
 
Asiatic House Martin 
 
  
 
Anthus richardi 
 
Richard's Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus godlewskii 
 
Blyth's Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus campestris 
 
Tawny Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus similis 
 
Long-billed Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus hodgsoni 
 
Olive-backed Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus trivialis 
 
Tree Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus pratensis 
 
Meadow Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus cervinus 
 
Red-throated Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus rubescens 
 
Buff bellied Pipit 
 
  
 
Anthus spinoletta 
 
Water Pipit 
 
  
 
Dendronanthus indicus 
 
Forest Wagtail 
 
  
 
Motacilla flava 
Yellow Wagtail 
  


--- PAGE 60 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Motacilla (f.) feldegg 
 
Black-headed Wagtail 
 
  
 
Motacilla citreola 
 
Citrine Wagtail 
 
  
 
Motacilla cinerea 
 
Grey Wagtail 
 
  
 
Motacilla alba 
 
White Wagtail 
 
  
 
Motacilla (a) personata 
 
Masked Wagtail 
 
  
 
Pycnonotus leucogenys 
 
White-cheeked Bulbul 
 
  
 
Pycnonotus jocosus 
 
Red-whiskered Bulbul 
 
  
 
Pycnonotus cafer 
 
Red-vented Bulbul 
 
  
 
Cercotrichas galactotes 
 
Rufous Bush Robin 
 
  
 
Cercotrichas podobe 
 
Black Bush Robin 
 
  
 
Erithacus rubecula 
 
Robin 
 
  
 
Luscinia luscinia 
 
Thrush Nightingale 
 
  
 
Luscinia megarhynchos 
 
Nightingale 
 
  
 
Luscinia svecica 
 
Bluethroat 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 61 ---

 
 
 
Phoenicurus 
erythronotus 
 
Eversmann's Redstart 
 
  
 
Phoenicurus ochruros 
 
Black Redstart 
 
  
 
Phoenicurus 
phoenicurus 
 
Redstart 
 
  
 
Phoenicurus 
phoenicurus 
samamisicus 
 
Ehrenberg's Redstart 
 
  
 
Cercomela melanura 
 
Blackstart 
 
  
 
Saxicola rubetra 
 
Whinchat 
 
  
 
Saxicola torquata 
 
Stonechat 
 
  
 
Saxicola torquata maura 
 
Siberian Stonechat 
 
  
 
Saxicola caprata 
 
Pied Stonechat 
 
  
 
Oenanthe isabellina 
 
Isabelline Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe oenanthe 
 
Northern Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe pleschanka 
 
Pied Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe hispanica 
Black-eared Wheatear 
  


--- PAGE 62 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Oenanthe deserti 
 
Desert Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe lugens 
 
Mourning Wheatear 
 
  
 
Oenanthe leucopyga 
 
White-crowned Black 
Wheatear 
 
  
 
Monticola saxatilis 
 
Rock Thrush 
 
  
 
Monticola solitarius 
 
Blue Rock Thrush 
 
  
 
Turdus torquatus 
 
Ring Ouzel 
 
  
 
Turdus merula 
 
Blackbird 
 
  
 
Turdus obscurus 
 
Eye-browed Thrush 
 
  
 
Turdus naumanni 
 
Dusky Thrush 
 
  
 
Turdus ruficollis 
 
Black-throated Thrush 
 
  
 
Turdus pilaris 
 
Fieldfare 
 
  
 
Turdus philomelos 
 
Song Thrush 
 
  
 
Turdus iliacus 
 
Redwing 
 
  
 
Turdus viscivorus 
Mistle Thrush 
  


--- PAGE 63 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cettia cetti 
 
Cetti's Warbler 
 
  
 
Prinia gracilis 
 
Graceful Warbler 
 
  
 
Scotocerca inquieta 
 
Scrub Warbler 
 
  
 
Locustella naevia 
 
Grasshopper Warbler 
 
  
 
Locustella fluviatilis 
 
River Warbler 
 
  
 
Locustella luscinioides 
 
Savi's Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus 
melanopogon 
 
Moustached Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus 
schoenobaenus 
 
Sedge Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus agricola 
 
Paddyfield Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus 
dumetorum 
 
Blyth's Reed Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus palustris 
 
Marsh Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus scirpaceus 
fuscus 
 
Eastern Reed Warbler 
 
  
 


--- PAGE 64 ---

 
 
 
Acrocephalus 
stentoreus 
 
Clamorous Reed Warbler 
 
  
 
Acrocephalus 
arundinaceus 
 
Great Reed Warbler 
 
  
 
Hippolais pallida 
 
Olivaceous Warbler 
 
  
 
Hippolais rama 
 
Syke's Warbler 
 
  
 
Hippolais icterina 
 
Icterine Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia nana 
 
Desert Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia hortensis 
 
Orphean Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia nisoria 
 
Barred Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia curruca 
 
Lesser Whitethroat 
 
  
 
Sylvia communis 
 
Whitethroat 
 
  
 
Sylvia borin 
 
Garden Warbler 
 
  
 
Sylvia atricapilla 
 
Blackcap 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus nitidus 
 
Green Warbler 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus inornatus 
Yellow-browed Warbler 
  


--- PAGE 65 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Phylloscopus humei 
 
Hume's Warbler 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus fuscatus 
 
Dusky Warbler 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus bonelli 
 
Bonelli's Warbler 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus sibilatrix 
 
Wood Warbler 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus collybita 
 
Chiffchaff 
 
  
 
Phylloscopus trochilus 
 
Willow Warbler 
 
  
 
Muscicapa 
cyanomelana 
 
Blue & White Flycatcher 
 
  
 
Muscicapa striata 
 
Spotted Flycatcher 
 
  
 
Ficedula parva 
 
Red-breasted Flycatcher 
 
  
 
Ficedula hypoleuca 
 
Pied Flycatcher 
 
  
 
Nectarinia asiatica 
 
Purple Sunbird 
 
  
 
Oriolus oriolus 
 
Golden Oriole 
 
  
 
Lanius isabellinus 
 
Isabelline Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius collurio 
Red-backed Shrike 
  


--- PAGE 66 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
lanius vittatus 
 
Bay-backed Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius schach 
 
Long-tailed Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius minor 
 
Lesser Grey Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius meridionalis 
 
Southern Grey Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius pallidirostris 
 
Steppe Grey Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius senator 
 
Woodchat Shrike 
 
  
 
Lanius nubicus 
 
Masked Shrike 
 
  
 
Dicrurus adsimilis 
 
Black Drongo 
 
  
 
Corvus splendens 
 
House Crow 
 
  
 
Corvus macrorhynchus 
 
Large-billed Crow 
 
  
 
Corvus ruficollis 
 
Brown-necked Raven 
 
  
 
Cinnyricinclus 
leucogaster 
 
Amethyst Starling 
 
  
 
Sturnus vulgaris 
 
Starling 
 
  
 
Sturnus roseus 
Rose-coloured Starling 
  


--- PAGE 67 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Creatophora cineracea 
 
Wattled Starling 
 
  
 
Sturnus contra 
 
Pied Mynah 
 
  
 
Acridotheres tristis 
 
Common Mynah 
 
  
 
Sturnus pagodarum 
 
Brahminy Mynah 
 
  
 
Acridotheres 
ginginianus 
 
Bank Mynah 
 
  
 
Passer domesticus 
 
House Sparrow 
 
  
 
Passer hispaniolensis 
 
Spanish Sparrow 
 
  
 
Passer montanus 
 
Tree Sparrow 
 
  
 
Petronia xanthocollis 
 
Yellow-throated Sparrow 
 
  
 
Lonchura malabarica 
 
Indian Silverbill 
 
  
 
Fringilla coelebs 
 
Chaffinch 
 
  
 
Fringilla montifringilla 
 
Brambling 
 
  
 
Carduelis carduelis 
 
Goldfinch 
 
  
 
Carduelis spinus 
Siskin 
  


--- PAGE 68 ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
Carduelis cannabina 
 
Linnet 
 
  
 
Rhodopechys 
githaginea 
 
Trumpeter Finch 
 
  
 
Carpodacus erythrinus 
 
Common Rosefinch 
 
  
 
Emberiza leucocephalos 
 
Pine Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza citrinella 
 
Yellowhammer 
 
  
 
Emberiza stewarti 
 
White-capped Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza striolata 
 
House Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza hortulana 
 
Ortolan Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza rustica 
 
Rustic Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza pusilla 
 
Little Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza aureola 
 
Yellow breasted Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza schoeniclus 
 
Reed Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza bruniceps 
 
Red headed Bunting 
 
  
 
Emberiza 
Black headed Bunting 
  


--- PAGE 69 ---

 
 
 
melanocephala 
 
 
 
Miliaria calandra 
 
Corn Bunting 
 
  
 
(Reptiles) 
 
Pristutrus rupestris 
 
Common Semaphore 
Gecko 
 
  
 
Stenodactylus slevini 
 
Slevin's Big-headed Gecko 
 
 
 
 
 
