

--- PAGE 1 ---

THE WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
ACT, 2011
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
PART I
PRELIMINARY
Section
1.
Short title and commencement
2.
Interpretation
3.
Vesting of water in President
4.
No ownership of water
5.
Water allocation and traditional practices in water resource
management
6.
Principles governing water resources management
PART II
THE WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
7.
Establishment of Water Resources Management Authority
8.
Functions of Authority
9.
Powers of Authority
10.
Relations with appropriate and conservancy authorities
11.
Constitution of Board
12.
Committees of Board
13.
Exercise of functions of Authority
14.
Delegation of functions and directions
15.
Director-General
16.
Secretary, inspectors and other staff of Authority
 PART III
CATCHMENT COUNCILS, SUB-CATCHMENT COUNCILS AND
WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS
17.
Constitution of catchment council
18.
Functions of catchment council
19.
Constitution of sub-catchment council
20.
Functions of sub-catchment council
21.
Catchment manager and other staff
22.
General functions of catchment manager
23.
Collection of charges
24.
Constitution of water users association
25.
Functions of water users association
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21  of 2011
265
Single copies of this Act may be obtained from the Government Printer,
P.O. Box 30136, 10101 Lusaka, Price K57,000 each.


--- PAGE 2 ---

PART IV
WATER RESOURCES PLANNING
Section
26.
General functions of Minister
27.
Appointment of Director responsible for water resources
planning and policy development
28.
Designation of catchment and sub-catchment
29.
Protected areas
30.
Consistency of water resources management with
environmental and national heritage protection
31.
National water resources strategy and plan
32.
Catchment management plan
33.
Contents of catchment management plan
34.
Publication of catchment management plan
35.
Approval of catchment management plan
36.
Effect of catchment management plan
37.
Review of catchment management plan
38.
National monitoring and information system
39.
Establishment of hydrological stations
40.
Arrangements with utility, appropriate or conservancy
authority
41.
Compulsory acquisition of land
42.
Delegation of functions to local authorities and other
authorities
PART V
WATER QUANTITY AND QUALITY MANAGEMENT
43.
Environmental flow, level or volume of water resource
44.
Reserve
45.
Water conservation management practices
46.
Diluting effluent and discharge into water resource
47.
Ambient standards, resource quality monitoring and
pollution control
48.
Pollution of water resources
49.
Steps to control or prevent water pollution
50.
Resource quality objectives
PART VI
WATER SHORTAGE AREAS
51.
Declaration of water shortage areas
52.
Powers of Authority in water shortage areas
53.
Sinking, deepening or altering boreholes in water shortage
areas restricted
54.
Maximum volume and rate of abstraction in water shortage
areas
266
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 3 ---

PART VII
MANAGEMENT OF SHARED WATER COURSES AND WATER RESOURCES
Section
55.
Policy on management of shared water resources
56.
Co-operation over shared water resources
57.
Powers and duties of Minister on management of shared
water resources
58.
Establishment of institutions to implement agreements
59.
Transitional provisions for existing institutions
PART VIII
WATER USE
60.
Uses of water
61.
Allocation of water and prioritising its uses
62.
Use of water for domestic purposes domestic and
non-commercial purposes
63.
Water for domestic purposes domestic and non-commercial
purposes in customary area
64.
Use of minimum quantities of water for investigating ground
water and preliminary works
65.
Investigation of use of water
66.
Wastage of water
67.
Records of amount of water used to be maintained
68.
Regulations for use of water
PART IX
PERMITS FOR WATER USE
69.
Integrated decision-making process and single permit or
licence system
70.
Activities where no permits required
71.
Activities where permits required
72.
Application for permit
73.
Duty to consider application for permit
74.
Considerations before grant of permit
75.
Temporary permit
76.
Grant of permit and conditions of permit
77.
Duration of permit
78.
Refusal of permit
79.
Renewal of permit
80.
Permit to run with land or undertaking
81.
Variation of permit
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21  of 2011
267


--- PAGE 4 ---

Section
82.
Variation of permit at request of permit holder
83.
Power to require permit application or re-application
84.
Cancellation of permit
85.
Abandonment of activities under permit
86.
Surrender of permit
87.
Register of permits
PART X
LICENSING OF CONSTRUCTORS AND DRILLERS
88.
Licensing of constructors and drillers
89.
Procedure for application, grant, modification etc, of licence
90.
Approved engineers
91.
Contractor deemed to be constructor or driller
92.
Register of constructors, drillers and engineers
PART XI
GROUND WATER AND BOREHOLES
93.
Protection of ground water
94.
Notice to drill borehole
95.
Permission to drill and access for inspection
96.
Defective borehole
97.
Interference with defective borehole
98.
Offences
99.
Information on ground water and confidentiality
100.
Register of boreholes
101.
Reporting of existing boreholes
PART XII
WATER WORKS
102.
Definitions
103.
Permission to construct water works
104.
Reporting of existing water works
105.
Register of water works
106.
Government schemes
107.
Community projects
108.
Precedence of Government schemes and community
projects
109.
Monitoring of dam works
110.
Commencement of dam works for dams
111.
Duty of owner on completion of dams and registration
112.
Reporting of dams in certain areas
268
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 5 ---

Section
113.
Supervision of dam works for large dams
114.
Maintenance and operation of large dams
115.
Periodic inspections of large dams
116.
Owner to carry out dam works
117.
Right of access, inspection, investigation and survey
118.
Emergencies arising during execution of dam works
119.
Access to dam for certain purposes
120.
Declaration of dam with safety risk
121.
Factors to determine whether dam is dam with safety risk
122.
Control measures for dam with safety risk and de-
commissioning of dams
123.
Registration of dam with safety risk
124.
Responsibilities of  constructor or engineer over works
PART XIII
EASEMENTS
125.
Easement not  proprietary interest in land
126.
Encumbrances
127.
Easement includes right of access
128.
Publication of easement
129.
Claim of easement and entry on land
130.
Method of claiming easement
131.
Consent of occupier to easement
132.
Application when occupier does not consent
133.
Determination of application for easement
134.
Lapsing of easement
135.
Damage caused by waterworks of permit holder
136.
Construction of waterworks and enjoyment of existing
waterworks
137.
Waterworks to be in state of repair
138.
Use of waterworks by occupier
139.
Excavated material
140.
Easements to be registered
141.
Termination of easement
142.
Registration of termination, lapse or variation of easement
PART XIV
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
143.
Definitions
144.
Early warning system
145.
Declarations of emergencies
146.
Measures during droughts
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
269


--- PAGE 6 ---

Section
147.
Measures during floods
148.
Emergency waterworks
149.
Spillage of harmful or toxic substances
PART XV
WATER USE CHARGES, FEES AND WATER DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND
150.
Pricing Strategy
151.
Water use charges
152.
Fees
153.
Recovery of water use charges and fees
154.
Retention of charges and fees and application of funds
155.
Water Development Trust Fund
156.
Financial matters of  Fund
PART XVI
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
157.
Appeals and disputes
158.
Time for lodging appeal
159.
Determination of appeals and disputes
160.
Entry by permit holder or person applying for permit
161.
Entry by inspectors or other authorised persons
162.
Manner of entry
163.
Use of water without permit prohibited
164.
Miscellaneous offences
165.
Remedy of defaults where not provided
166.
Duty to provide information to inspector
167.
Requirement to state name and address
168.
Service of notices
169.
Order, etc, to be in writing
170.
Authentication of documents
171.
Protection of Minister and others from liability
172.
General penalties for offences
173.
Offences by corporation
174.
Prosecutions
175.
Fine in lieu of prosecution
176.
Recovery by distress
177.
Public consultation
178.
No warranty implied by inspection
179.
Regulations
180.
Repeal, savings and transitional provisions
FIRST SCHEDULE
SECOND SCHEDULE
THIRD SCHEDULE
270
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 7 ---

An Act to establish the Water Resources Management
Authority and define its functions and powers; provide
for the management, development, conservation,
protection and preservation of the water resource and its
ecosystems; provide for the equitable, reasonable and
sustainable utilisation of the water resource; ensure the
right to draw or take water for domestic and non-
commercial purposes, and that the poor and vulnerable
members of the society have an adequate and sustainable
source of water free from any charges; create an enabling
environment for adaptation to climate change; provide for
the constitution, functions and composition of catchment
councils, sub-catchment councils and water users
associations; provide for international and regional co-
operation in, and equitable and sustainable utilisation of,
shared water resources; provide for the domestication
and implementation of the basic principles and rules of
international law relating to the environment and shared
water resources as specified in the treaties, conventions
and agreements to which Zambia is a State Party; repeal
and replace the Water Act, 1949; and provide for matters
connected with, or incidental to, the foregoing.
[18th April, 2011
ENACTED by the Parliament of Zambia.
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1.
This Act may be cited as the Water Resources Management
Act, 2011, and shall come into operation on such date as the Minister
may, by statutory instrument, appoint.
2.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
 “ abstraction ” means the removal of water from any water
resource, whether temporarily or permanently, and
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 271
Short title
and
commence-
ment
Interpretation
GOVERNMENT OF ZAMBIA
ACT
No. 21 of 2011
Date of Assent:15th April, 2011


--- PAGE 8 ---

 “ abstract ” shall be construed accordingly;
“ agricultural purposes ” means the use of water for
commercial—
(a) irrigation;
(b) fishing; or
(c) livestock husbandry;
 “ allocation ” means the quantity of water set aside for a
specific purpose or that which the permit holder is entitled
to take or use for a particular purpose as specified in the
permit,  and “allocate” or “allocated” shall be construed
accordingly;
“ appointed date ” means the date appointed by the Minister
under section one;
“ appropriate authority ” means the Minister for the time being
having responsibility for, or such public or statutory officer
or body having powers under any other law over, any
natural resource situated in, or other activity in, a catchment
or sub-catchment and includes a public or statutory officer,
body or institution under the following—
(a) the Zambia Wildlife Act, 1998;
(b) the Environmental Management Act, 2011;
(c) the Water Supply and Sanitation Act, 1997;
(d) the National Heritage Conservation Commission Act;
(e) the Lands Act;
(f) the Lands and Deeds Registry Act;
(g) the Mines and Minerals Development Act, 2008;
(h) the  Fisheries Act, 2011;
(i) the Forests Act;
(j) the Inland Water Shipping Act;
(k) the Town and Country Planning Act;
(l) the Public Health Act;
(m) the Standards Act;
(n) the Local Government Act;
(o) the Disaster Management Act, 2010;
(p) the Citizens Economic Empowerment Act, 2006;
(q) the Zambia Development Agency Act, 2006;
(r) the Public Private Partnership Act, 2009;
272
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Act No 12 of
1998
Act No. 12 of
2011
Act No. 28 of
1997
Cap. 173
Cap. 185
Act No. 7 of
2008
Cap. 199
Cap. 281
Act No. 13 of
2010
Act No. 9 of
2006
Act No. 11 of
2006
Act No. 14 of
2009
Cap. 184
Act No. 22    of
2011
Cap. 466
Cap. 283
Cap. 295
Cap 416


--- PAGE 9 ---

(s) the Tourism and Hospitality Act, 2010;
(t) the Energy Regulation Act; and
(u) any treaty, agreement or convention, to which
Zambia is a State Party, relating to the management
of a shared  water resource;
“ aquifer ” means any geological formation which absorbs,
stores and transmits ground water;
“ arbitration ” means  the resolution of disputes or conflicts
under this Act or in accordance with the Arbitration Act,
2000;
“ Authority ” means the Water Resources Management
Authority established under section seven;
“ biodiversity ” means the variability among living organisms
from all sources, including genetically modified organisms,
terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the
ecological complexes of which they are a part of;
“ Board ” means the Board of the Authority constituted under
section eleven;
“ borehole ” includes an excavation or any artificially
constructed or improved underground cavity, as may be
prescribed, which can be used for —
(a) intercepting, collecting or storing water in, or
removing water from, an aquifer;
(b) observing and collating data and information on water
in an aquifer; or
(c) recharging an aquifer; but does not include a well;
“ brackish ” means salty;
“ catchment ” means a geographical area which naturally
drains into a water resource and from which the water
resource receives  surface or ground flow that originates
from rainfall;
“ catchment council ” means a catchment council constituted
under section seventeen;
“ catchment manager ” means a person appointed as a
catchment manager under section twenty-one;
“ Chairperson ” means the person appointed as Chairperson
of the Board under section eleven;
“ charges ” include levies and tariffs;
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
273
Act No.  of
2010
Cap. 436
Act No. 19 of
2000


--- PAGE 10 ---

“ climatic ” means amounts of seasonal precipitation and
evapo-transpiration contributing to the water balance and
water resource flow;
“ climate change ” means weather changes such as heat
waves, extreme weather, temperature and precipitation with
its modulating influences such as microbial contamination
pathways, transmission dynamics, agro-ecosystems,
hydrology, socio-economic and demographic factors and
their resultant effects on the water resources and human
health and wellbeing;
“ commercial livestock husbandry ” means the use of water
for the sustenance and support of livestock which are not
kept only for the subsistence needs of a household;
“ commercial fishing ” means the catching of fish in bulk for
sale or in order to realise a profit, and includes aquaculture;
“ commercial irrigation ” means the use of water for farming
that exceeds the number of cubic meters a day as
prescribed;
“ committee ” means a committee of the Board established
under section twelve;
“ conservancy authority ” means any person or institution
who, either voluntarily or under the authority of any law,
manages, conserves, preserves, maintains or protects the
environment;
“ constructor ” means any person or institution licensed by
the Board to construct waterworks under section eighty-
eight;
“ customary area ” means the area described as such in the
Schedules to the Zambia (State Lands and Reserves)
Orders, 1928 to 1964 and the Zambia (Trust Lands) Orders,
1947 to 1964, as specified under the Lands Act;
“ Director ” means the person appointed as such under section
twenty-seven;
“ Director-General” means the person appointed as such under
section fifteen;
“ district council ” includes a city council and municipal council;
“ domestic or non-commercial purposes ” means the household
use of water for—
(a) drinking, cooking, washing, bathing or sanitation;
(b) subsistence gardening and support of livestock not
being commercial livestock husbandry;
274
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Cap. 184


--- PAGE 11 ---

(c) subsistence fishing;
(d) the making of bricks for the private use of the
occupier;
(e) the dipping of livestock not being commercial
livestock husbandry; or
(f) firefighting; for which no permit is required for the
use of that water under this Act;
“ driller ” means any person or institution licensed by the
Board  to drill boreholes under section eighty-eight;
“ easement ” means the right, under a permit, to enter, use
and occupy so much of the land of another person as may
be necessary for, or incidental to, the construction or
maintenance of waterworks authorised under this Act or
the exercise or enjoyment of any entitlement conferred by
a permit;
“ ecological ” means an amount of seasonal water needed
for environmental and ecosystem maintenance and
sustainability, including the quantities and carrying capacities
of ecosystems;
“ ecosystem ” means the biological community of interacting
organisms and their physical environment;
“ effluent ” means waste water or fluid of domestic,
agricultural, trade, industrial or other origin, treated or
untreated and discharged, directly or indirectly, into the
aquatic environment;
“ engineer ” means an engineer approved by the Board under
section ninety;
“ Environmental Agency ” means the Agency established
under the Environmental Management Act, 2011;
“ environmental flow ” means the water provided within a
water resource to maintain ecosystems and their benefits
where there are competing users and where flows are
regulated by means of waterworks or management
instruments;
“ environmental purposes ” means the  use of water for the
preservation and maintenance of the  ecosystem;
“ equitable ” means fair, reasonable and just;
“ existing right ” means an entitlement to use water granted
under the repealed Act or any permit to discharge effluent
granted under any other law;
“ Fund ” means the Water Development Trust Fund
established under section one hundred and fifty-five;
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
275
Act No.12
of 2011
Cap. 198


--- PAGE 12 ---

“ gender ” means female or male and the role individuals play
in society as a result of their sex and status;
“ geographic ” means the relative position and size of an area
in terms of a catchment;
“ ground water ” means any water resource found under the
surface of the ground;
“ HIV and AIDS ” means the human immunodeficiency virus
and the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome;
“ hydroelectric purposes ” means the use of water for the
production of electricity;
“ hydrographic ” means the measured seasonal quantities and
quality of water available in a water resource in terms of
water levels and streams contributing to the water level,
sedimentation and chemical quality;
“ hydrologic ” means the seasonal quantities of water
resources available in a water resource in terms of river
flow, underground flow and surface runoff;
“ hydrological ” means all the elements relating to the
properties, occurrence and movement of water;
“ hydrological cycle ” means the complete cycle of phenomena
through which water passes from the atmosphere to the
earth and back to the atmosphere;
“ hydrological station ” means a place where measurements
and observations of the flow, level or other parameter of
any surface or ground water are taken, made or recorded;
“ industrial purposes ” includes the use of water for
manufacturing or commercial activities, processing,
construction, fabrication, quarrying, smelting, mechanical
or slaughtering;
“ licence ”  means a licence granted to a constructor or  driller
under section eighty-eight;
“ licensee ” means a person holding a licence granted under
this Act;
“ livestock ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Animal
Health Act, 2010;
“ local authority ” means a city council, municipal council or
district council as established under the Local Government
Act;
“ management ” in relation to a water resource includes—
(a) planning the sustainable development of the water
resource and providing for the implementation of
any catchment management plan and national water
resources strategy and plan; and
276
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Act No. of
27 2010
Cap. 281


--- PAGE 13 ---

(b) promoting the rational and optimal utilisation,
protection, conservation and control of the water
resource;
“ member ”  means a member of the Board;
“ mining ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Mines and
Minerals Development Act, 2008;
“ mining operations ”  means operations carried out in the
course of mining;
“ mining purposes ” means the use of water for mining
operations;
“ municipal purposes ” means the supply of water and
sanitation services in accordance with the Water Supply
and Sanitation Act, 1997;
“ national water resources strategy and plan ”  means a
strategy formulated by the Authority under section thirty-
one;
“ navigational purposes ” means the use of water for sailing,
transport, hunting, recreational fishing, recreation or
tourism;
“ occupier ” in relation to land, means—
(a) a statutory leaseholder, sub-lease and under-lease
holder and any other person having a legal or
contractual right to land or to the administration of
land;
(b) any person who, by any established right, custom or
estate is, or is entitled to be, the holder or possessor
of land; or
(c) any person to whom a mining licence or mining
location has been granted under the Mines and
Minerals Development Act, 2008;
“ permit ” means an authorisation for the right to use of water
for the purposes specified in this Act, for the construction
of any water works or for the sinking, altering or deepening
of any borehole in a water shortage area;
“ permit holder ” means a person holding a permit granted
under this Act;
“ pollution ” in relation to water, means—
(a) any direct or indirect contamination or  alteration of
the biological, chemical or physical properties of
water, including changes in colour, odour, taste,
temperature or turbidity; or
(b) any discharge of any gaseous, liquid, solid or other
substance into any water resource;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 277
Act No. 28 of
1997
Act No. 7 of
2008
Act No. 7 of
2008


--- PAGE 14 ---

as will, or is likely to, create a nuisance or render the water
detrimental, harmful or injurious to, or potentially harmful or injurious
to, the health, safety or welfare of any human being, bird, fish or
other aquatic ecosystem, livestock, wildlife or the environment;
“ recreational fishing ” means the catching of fish for
amusement or as a sporting activity;
“ repealed Act ” means the Water Act;
“ reserve ” in relation to a water resource, means the quantity
and quality of water required to—
(a) satisfy basic human needs of all the people who are,
or may be, supplied from the water resource; and
(b) protect aquatic ecosystems in order to secure
ecologically sustainable development and use of
the water resource;
“ resource quality ” means the quality of all aspects of a water
resource including the—
(a) water quality stipulated for the reserve;
(b) quantity, pattern, timing, water level and assurance
of environmental flow;
(c) physical, chemical and biological characteristics of
the water;
(d) character and condition of the instream and riparian
habitat; and
(e) characteristics, condition and distribution of the
aquatic life;
“ resource quality objectives ” means the level to be achieved
and maintained in each aspect of the resource quality for
the water resource;
“ riparian habitat ” includes the physical structure and
associated areas of a water resource which are commonly
characterised by alluvial soils and inundated or flooded to
an extent, and with a frequency, sufficient to support
vegetation of species with a composition and physical
structure distinct from those of adjacent land areas;
“ riparian land ” means any land on, or along the boundary of
the whole or any portion of, which a water resource exists;
“ shared watercourse ” means a water resource that forms,
or is bisected by, an international border between Zambia
and another State or among States including Zambia;
278
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Cap. 198


--- PAGE 15 ---

“ sub-catchment council ” means a sub-catchment council
constituted under section nineteen;
“ subsistence ” means that which is necessary for the
sustenance of life or any activity undertaken to provide for
the needs of a household;
“ subsistence fishing ” means the catching of fish for
sustenance;
“ supply of water in bulk ” means a supply of water for
distribution to the public by, or on behalf of, any person or
utility;
“ surface water ” means all water found on or below the bed
of a water resource and includes water in storage works,
drainage works or permanent pools;
“ sustainable ”, in relation to water, means the human use of
a water resource so that it may yield the greatest
continuous benefit to the present generations while
maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations
of future generations;
“ traditional authority ” means a Chief who has been recognised
under the Chiefs Act;
“ training and research purposes ” means the use of water
for education, skills training and scientific and technological
research;
“ use ” means an entitlement limited to the beneficial,
reasonable and equitable use of water for the purposes
and up to the limit prescribed or specified by a permit and
includes—
(a) abstraction, obstruction or  diversion of water;
(b) storing water;
(c) discharge of materials or substances into water;
(d) dewatering of a mine, quarry or any land;
(e) altering the bed, banks, course or characteristics of
a water resource; or
(f) any prescribed activity of a kind relating to water;
but does not include a guarantee as to the availability of water;
“ utility ” means any person who supplies water in bulk;
“ Vice-Chairperson ” means the person appointed as Vice-
Chairperson of the Board under section eleven;
“ waste water ” means water which has been used for
domestic, commercial, agricultural, trading, mining or
industrial purposes or other purposes and as a result of
such uses may or may not cause water pollution when
discharged into the aquatic environment;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 279
Cap. 287


--- PAGE 16 ---

“ water ” means water in its natural state, including—
(a) surface water;
(b) water which rises naturally on any land or drains or
falls naturally on to any land, even if it does not
visibly join any watercourse; or
(c) ground water;
“ Water Board ” means the Board established under the
repealed Act;
“ watercourse ” means a system of surface waters and ground
waters constituting, by virtue of their physical relationship,
a unitary whole and normally flowing into a common
terminus;
“ water resource ” includes water, any river, spring, hotspring,
pan, lake, pond, swamp, marsh, stream, watercourse,
estuary, aquifer, artesian basin or other body of naturally
flowing or standing water;
“ Water resource protection area ” means a catchment, sub-
catchment or geographic area that is declared, by the
Minister, as a water resource protection area under section
twenty-nine;
“ water shortage area ” means an area declared, by the
Minister, under section fifty, to be a water shortage area;
“ water storage works ” includes a dam, reservoir, barrage,
weir or  any facility for storing water, exceeding the volume
prescribed, for periods of time, but does not include a
borehole;
“ water resources protection area ” means a catchment, sub-
catchment or geographic area that is declared, by the
Minister, as a water resource protection area under section
twenty-nine;
“ water users association ” means an association constituted
under section twenty four;
“ water works ” means—
(a) a canal, channel, embankment, filter, filterbed,
pipeline, pumping plant, purification plant, plant for
the generation of hydroelectric power or water
storage works;
(b) any accessory, apparatus, appliance, fitting,
machinery or other thing constructed, erected or
used for, or in connection with, the abstraction,
control, diversion, drainage, filtration, passage,
purification, storage, supply or use of water
including effluent or waste water, conservation of
rain water or the development of water power; or
280
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 17 ---

(c) any gauge post, measuring weir or other appliance
erected or used for undertakings authorised by, or
under, this Act;
and includes any area around any hydraulic structure or water
works, necessary for their use, operation, maintenance and
protection; and
“ Zambia Bureau of Standards ” means the Bureau of
Standards established under the Standards Act.
3.
Subject to this Act and notwithstanding any other law,
instrument or document, all water, in its natural state, in Zambia
vests in the President and is held by the President on behalf and
benefit of the people of Zambia.
4.
Notwithstanding any other law, a person shall not own any
water, in its natural state, in Zambia and no property in such water
shall be acquired.
5.
(1) After the commencement of this Act and
notwithstanding when any existing entitlement to use water, in its
natural state, commenced but subject to the Second Schedule—
(a) no entitlement shall exist to use that water except as
provided under this Act; and
(b) allocation of that water for various purposes shall
be in accordance with this Act.
(2)
The Authority shall ensure that traditional practices as
recognised in customary areas and which are beneficial to water
resource management are taken into account in the management
of water resources.
6.
The management of water resources in Zambia shall be
governed by the following principles—
(a) water resources shall be managed in an integrated
and sustainable manner;
(b) water is a basic human need and as such domestic
and non-commercial needs shall enjoy priority of
allocation use;
(c) the environment is a water user and shall enjoy
second priority of allocation use to the human need;
(d) there shall be equitable access to water;
(e) water resources shall be managed in such a manner
as will help combat malaria and other waterborne
diseases in order to ensure access to safe water;
(f) water shall be used efficiently, sustainably and
beneficially in the public interest;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 281
Vesting of
water in
President
No
ownership of
water
Water
allocation
and
traditional
practices in
water
resource
management
Principles
governing
water
resources
management
Cap. 416


--- PAGE 18 ---

(g) water has an economic and a social value and this
shall be reflected in its use, but all domestic and
non-commercial use of water shall not be required
to obtain a water permit;
(h) water has an economic value and the cost of
facilitating its use has a significant administrative
cost element and this shall be reflected in the
charges for water permits for the right to use water
for economic purposes;
(i) there shall be no private ownership of water and no
authorisation for its use shall be in perpetuity;
(j) the State shall be the trustee of the nation’s water
resources and shall ensure that water is allocated
equitably, protected, used, developed, conserved,
managed and controlled in a sustainable and
equitable manner, in the public interest while
promoting environmental and social values and
protecting Zambia’s territorial sovereignty;
(k) there shall be equity between both gender in
accessing water resources and, in particular,
women shall be empowered and fully participate
in issues and decisions relating to the sustainable
development of water resources and, specifically,
in the use of water;
(l) efforts to create wealth shall be reflected in all
decisions made in relation to the use of water;
(m) water resources management and planning shall
contribute to the eradication of hunger and poverty
and this shall be reflected in all decisions made in
relation to the use of water, in particular, the right
to use water for domestic and noncommercial
purposes shall not be under any permit or attract
any charge for its use;
(n) location of a water resource on land shall not itself
confer preferential rights to its use;
(o) the basic management unit shall be the catchment in
recognition of the unity of the hydrological cycle;
(p) Zambia’s water resources shall be protected, used,
developed, conserved, managed and controlled
sustainably, beneficially, reasonably and equitably
for the needs of the present and future generations;
and
282
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 19 ---

(q) the management, development and utilisation of water
resources shall take into account climate change
adaptation.
PART II
THE WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY
7.
(1) There is hereby established the Water Resources
Management Authority which shall be a body corporate with
perpetual succession and a common seal capable of suing and of
being sued in its corporate name, and with power, subject to this
Act, to do all such acts and things as a body corporate may, by law,
do or perform.
(2)
The First Schedule applies in respect of the Authority and
the Board of the Authority.
8.
(1) The function of the Authority is to promote and adopt a
dynamic, gender-sensitive, integrated, interactive, participatory and
multisectoral approach to water resources management and
development that includes human, land, environmental and socio-
economic considerations, especially poverty reduction and the
elimination of water borne diseases, including malaria.
(2)
Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) and
subject to this Act, the Authority shall—
(a) identify and protect potential sources of freshwater supply;
(b) conserve, preserve and protect the environment, in
particular, wetlands, quarries, dambos, marshlands and
headwaters and take into account climate change and
the challenges posed by climate change by—
(i) measuring, minimising and managing the impacts
of climate change on water resources using
effective adaptation approaches;
(ii) being proactive in adapting watershed protection,
wetlands and infrastructure programmes;
(iii) developing tools, standards, guidelines and best
practices to understand and measure the nature
and magnitude of chemical, biological and
physical effects of climate change on water
resources;
(iv) applying environmental science, technology and
information to guide and support proactive
climate change planning and management;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 283
Establishment
of Water
Resources
Management
Authority
Functions of
Authority


--- PAGE 20 ---

(v) ensuring extensive participation in interagency and
intraagency research planning related to climate
change; and
(vi) investing in climate change education on water
issues and supporting the sharing of information
about Government and local responses to water
impacts of climate change;
(c) plan for and ensure the sustainable and rational utilisation,
management and development of water resources based
on community and public needs and priorities, within the
framework of national economic developmental policies;
(d) ensure, in collaboration with the Ministries responsible for
community development, finance, commerce, agriculture,
fisheries and livestock, youth and child development and
disaster management and mitigation, that the
management and planning of water resources contributes
to the eradication of hunger and poverty;
(e) provide access to water resources of acceptable quantity
and quality for various purposes;
(f) ensure, in collaboration with the ministries responsible for
health and local government, that water resources are
managed in such a manner as will help combat  malaria
and other waterborne diseases;
(g) set standards and guidelines, with relevant appropriate
authorities, to be used in undertaking water resources
management and developmental activities in a
catchment;
(h) in consultation with the institution responsible for national
statistics, establish and maintain an information system,
which will be accessible by both gender, in accordance
with regulations issued by the Minister providing for the
content of the system, which shall include relevant
hydrological, hyrogeological, meteorological,
climatological, water quality, water storage and supply
and use data, and relevant information on potentials for
the use of water;
(i) publish forecasts, projections  and information on water
resources;
(j) advise the Minister on matters relating to, and recommend
to the Minister policies for, the utilisation, development,
management, conservation,  preservation and protection
of water resources and shared water resources;
284
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 21 ---

(k) research on, and carry out analysis of, the structural
linkages between gender relations, poverty, disease,
climate change, water use and development;
(l) where the Minister has not constituted a catchment council,
perform the functions of a catchment council;
(m) where necessary or expedient, empower any appropriate
authority or conservancy authority to carry out any
function under this Act and utilise its facilities for the
better regulation and management of water resources;
(n) set ambient water quality standards, for each water
resource, in consultation with the Environmental Agency
and recommend these standards to the Zambia Bureau
of Standards;
(o) monitor the resource quality of the water;
(p) provide technical support to catchment councils, and sub-
catchment councils and water users associations;
(q) coordinate and monitor the activities of catchment  councils,
and sub-catchment councils and water users
associations;
(r) liase in, and supervise where necessary, and in collaboration
with the relevant authority responsible for disaster
management and mitigation, the management of any
emergency declared under this Act;
(s) approve catchment management plans and sub-catchment
management plans;
(t) maintain hydrological equipment for all catchment areas;
(u) ensure that the right to use water for domestic and non-
commercial  purposes  does  not  attract  any charge;
and
(v) address the impact of malaria, HIV and AIDS and other
diseases on, or in, the water sector.
9.
The Authority, in accordance with this Act, may—
(a) exercise control over all water resources in Zambia;
(b) plan, review and approve management plans in a
catchment or sub-catchment, including inter-catchment
and intra-catchment diversions;
(c) issue equitable and reasonable water entitlements and
allocate water equitably and reasonably for various
purposes stipulated under this Act;
(d) grant water permits and licences for the right to use water
for various purposes under this Act, except for the right
to use water for domestic and non-commercial purposes;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 285
Powers of
Authority


--- PAGE 22 ---

(e) carry out advocacy programmes, in liaison with the
ministries responsible for health, community development
and social welfare and local government, with respect
to waterborne diseases in communities; and
(f) enforce and implement this Act.
10.
The Authority shall liaise, consult, collaborate and cooperate
with all the relevant appropriate authorities and conservancy
authorities in the management, development and use of water
resources and may, for such purposes, have joint programmes, plans,
strategies and policies, taking into account national decentralisation
policies with respect to water.
11.
(1) There is hereby constituted a Board for the Authority
which shall consist of —
(a) four persons with expertise in any of the following:
(i) environmental management;
(ii) hydropower;
(iii) engineering; and
(iv) commerce and industry;
(b) one person each from the following groups:
(i) farmers;
(ii) traditional authorities; and
(iii) consumers;
(c) a representative of the Attorney-General;
(d) one representative each of the Ministries responsible for
water resources, local government, agriculture and the
environment;
(e) the Commissioner of Lands; and
(f) one other person.
(2)
The Minister shall appoint the members of the Board.
(3)
The Minister shall appoint the Chairperson and Vice-
Chairperson of the Board from amongst the members referred to
in subsection (1), except that a public officer shall not be appointed
Chairperson.
(4)
A person shall not be appointed as a member of the Board
if that person—
(a) is not a citizen of Zambia;
(b) is an undischarged bankrupt;
(c) has been convicted of an offence under this Act;
286
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Relations
with
appropriate
and
conservancy
authorities
Constitution
of Board


--- PAGE 23 ---

(d) has been convicted of an offence involving fraud or
dishonesty; or
(e) has been convicted of an offence under any other written
law and sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less
than six months without the option of a fine.
12.
(1) The Board may, for the purposes of performing the
functions of the Authority, establish such committees as it considers
necessary and delegate to any of those committees any of the
functions of the Authority.
(2)
The Board may appoint, as members of a committee,
persons who are or are not members of the Board, except that at
least one member of the Board shall be a member of a committee.
(3)
A person serving as a member of a committee shall hold
office for such period as the Board may determine.
(4)
Subject to any specific or general direction of the Board, a
committee may regulate its own procedure.
13.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided under this Act, the
Board shall exercise the functions and powers of the Authority
relating to or connected with—
(a) policy matters;
(b) the grant, varying, cancellation and renewal of permits
and licences;
(c) the establishment or issue of guidelines and standards;
and
 (d) the making of recommendations to the Minister for
amendments to this Act or the issue of rules or regulations
under this Act.
(2)
The Board shall carry out such other functions specifically
assigned to the Board under this Act.
14.
(1) The Board may, subject to any conditions imposed,
and guidelines issued, by the Board, delegate any of its functions to
the Director-General, and shall, in particular, delegate its power to
grant, vary, cancel or renew permits or licences, except that the
Board shall not delegate its powers and functions specified under
paragraphs (a), (c) and (d) of subsection (1) of section thirteen.
(2)
Subject to this Act, the Board may, on the recommendation
of the Director-General, by directions in writing and subject to any
terms and conditions as it considers necessary, delegate to a
catchment council, a sub-catchment council or water users
association any of the functions of the Authority as it considers
necessary for the efficient management of water resources at the
local level.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
287
Committees
of Board
Exercise of
functions of
Authority
Delegation of
functions
and
directions


--- PAGE 24 ---

(3)
A catchment council, sub-catchment council and water
users association shall perform such functions of the Authority as
are specifically stipulated for such bodies under this Act.
(4)
The Minister may give to the Board general or specific
directions, relating to the discharge of the functions of the Authority
and the Board shall give effect to those directions.
15.
(1) The Board shall appoint, on such terms and conditions
as the Board may determine, a Director-General who shall be the
chief executive officer of the Authority.
(2)
The Director-General shall be responsible under the general
directions of the Board for—
(a) the management and administration of the affairs of the
Authority;
(b) the implementation of the decisions of the Board; and
(c) any other function assigned or delegated to the Director-
General by the Board or by or under this Act.
(3)
Except as otherwise provided under this Act, the Director-
General shall exercise the general functions and powers of the
Authority relating to, and connected with, the general management
and development of water resources and shall, where the Board
has delegated to the Director-General the power to grant, vary,
cancel or renew permits and licences, do so in accordance with—
(a) conditions specified in this Act;
(b) regulations issued under this Act;
(c) guidelines established by the Board; and
(d) any directions, in writing, not inconsistent with this Act,
given by the Board.
(4)
The Director-General shall attend meetings of the Board
and may address those meetings but shall not vote on any matter.
16.
(1)
There shall be a Secretary for the Authority who shall
be appointed by the Board on such terms and conditions as the
Board may determine.
(2)
The Secretary shall, under the general supervision of the
Director-General, carry out corporate secretarial duties for the
Board and perform such other functions as may be assigned to the
Secretary by the Director-General.
(3)
The Director-General may appoint, on such terms and
conditions as the Board may determine, inspectors, water officers
and such other staff considered necessary for the performance of
the functions of the Authority.
288
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Director-
General
Secretary,
inspectors
and other
staff of
Authority


--- PAGE 25 ---

PART III
CATCHMENT COUNCILS, SUBCATCHMENT COUNCILS AND
WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS
17.
(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, by statutory instrument, constitute a catchment council
for a catchment.
(2)
A catchment council shall be composed of the following
members:
(a) not more than three representatives from the provincial
administration situated in the catchment nominated by
the Permanent Secretaries responsible for the provinces
in which a catchment council is situated; and
(b) not more than nine other stakeholders representing, as
far as is possible, the users of water in the catchment,
nominated by the users of water or, where there is a
water users association, by the association, appropriate
authorities and conservancy authorities operating in the
catchment, in accordance with prescribed criteria.
(3)
The Minister shall appoint the members of a catchment
council in accordance with the prescribed criteria, except that the
Minister shall ensure that, when making the appointments to the
catchment council, the persons nominated represent, as far as is
possible, all the sub-catchments in the catchment.
(4)
In the exercise of the power under subsection (1), the
Minister shall prescribe—
(a) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of, or by,  a
catchment council in the discharge of its functions; and
(b) the remuneration, if any, and allowances payable to
members of a catchment council from funds allocated
for that purpose by the Authority to meet the reasonable
expenses  incurred by the members and staff of a
catchment council in connection with the business of
the catchment council.
18.
(1) Subject to this Act, a catchment council shall, for the
purposes of the water resources in that catchment:
(a) recommend to the Director-General the decisions of a
sub-catchment council on the issue of  permits and
licences in the subcatchment  council, as may be
prescribed;
(b) regulate and supervise the use of water;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
289
Constitution
of catchment
council
Functions of
catchment
council


--- PAGE 26 ---

(c) investigate and deal with any dispute relating to the use of
water as may be prescribed;
(d) consolidate data forwarded to it by a sub-catchment council
or any other person;
(e) in conjunction with the Authority, prepare, and periodically
update, catchment management plans for its catchment
in accordance with this Act;
(f) harmonise sub-catchment management plans and local
management plans with catchment management plans
and facilitate implementation of these plans;
(g) prepare catchment reports and regularly report to the
Authority on catchment matters;
(h) supervise and coordinate activities of sub-catchment
councils and provide technical support to sub-catchment
councils and water users associations, where necessary;
(i)carry out hydro-geological and hydro geological services,
including water quantity and quality and monitoring and
assessment of water resources and climate change;
(j) take appropriate action in emergency situations related to
water as may be prescribed;
(k) carry out public awareness campaigns for, and inform the
public on, water resources and environmental
management and climate change in cooperation with
sub-catchment councils;
(l) promote gender mainstreaming in the decision-making
processes relating to the use of water;
(m) recommend, to the Director-General, disciplinary and other
measures to be taken in respect of any member of a
catchment council, sub-catchment council or water users
association or any officer of the Authority working with
those institutions;
(n) undertake catchment protection and resource quality
monitoring and evaluation;
(o) propose catchment management strategies to the Authority;
(p) monitor implementation of international and regional
agreements at catchment level;
(q) perform the functions of a sub-catchment council where
none exists;
(r) collect revenue through charges for the use of water and
transmit these to the Authority;
290
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 27 ---

(s) ensure compliance with this Act; and
(t) perform any other function conferred or imposed upon a
catchment council by, or under, this Act.
(2)
For the better exercise of its functions, a catchment council
may delegate to a catchment manager, with or without conditions,
such of its functions as it considers necessary, except that:
(a) the delegation shall not prevent the catchment council
from exercising the functions concerned where the
catchment council has not already exercised, or is not
in the process of exercising, a particular  function; and
(b) the catchment council may, in any matter dealt with by
the catchment manager, after hearing all the parties
concerned and on giving due consideration to the matter,
amend or withdraw any decision of the catchment
manager made in the exercise of a delegated function.
19.
(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, by statutory instrument, constitute a sub-catchment
council.
(2)
A sub-catchment council shall be composed of the following
members—
(a) a representative from, and nominated by, each of the local
authorities in the sub-catchment, nominated by a local
authority;
(b) not more than two persons representing the traditional
authorities in the sub-catchment nominated by those
traditional authorities; and
(c) not more than nine other stakeholders representing, as far
as is possible, the users of water in the sub-catchment
nominated by the users of water, or, where there is a
water users association, by the association, appropriate
authorities and conservancy authorities in the sub-
catchment, in accordance with prescribed criteria.
(3)
The Minister shall appoint the members of a sub-catchment
council in accordance with the prescribed criteria.
(4)
In the exercise of the power specified under subsection
(1), the Minister shall prescribe—
(a) the procedure to be followed at meetings of, or by, a sub-
catchment council in the discharge of its functions; and
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
291
Constitution
of sub-
catchment
council


--- PAGE 28 ---

(b) the remuneration, if any, and allowances payable to
members of a sub-catchment council from funds
allocated for that purpose by the Authority to meet the
reasonable expenses incurred by the members and staff
of the sub-catchment  council in connection with the
business of the sub-catchment council.
(5)
The Minister may, by statutory instrument, on the
recommendation of the Authority, upon hearing any representations
made by a sub-catchment council—
(a) abolish a sub-catchment council;
(b) alter the area for which a sub-catchment council was
constituted; or
(c) alter the membership or the name of a sub-catchment
council.
20.
(1) Subject to this Act and without derogating from the
powers of a catchment council, a sub-catchment council shall, within
the area for which it is constituted and for the purposes of the
water resources in that area—
(a) prepare, in collaboration with the appropriate authorities
in the sub-catchment, an allocation plan for the sub-
catchment for inclusion in the sub-catchment plan and
submit the sub-catchment plan to the catchment council;
(b) undertake investigations, as may be prescribed, and make
recommendations on applications for a permit or licence
and submit such recommendations to the catchment
council for consideration;
(c) regulate the use of  water;
(d) monitor permits, licenses, water works,  water quantity
and quality;
(e) develop sub-catchment management plans;
(f) harmonise local management plans with sub-catchment
management plans and submit them to the catchment
council for harmonisation with the catchment
management plan;
(g) facilitate implementation of sub-catchment management
plans;
(h) collect hydrological, hydro-geological meteorological, water
quality and quantity, socio-economic and environmental
data and forward the data to the catchment council—
292
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Functions of
sub-
catchment
council


--- PAGE 29 ---

(i) liaise and coordinate with appropriate authorities,
conservancy authorities and  water users associations
on any matter relating to, or impacting on, the water
resources in the sub-catchment, including measures on
adaptation to climate change;
(j) investigate and deal with disputes relating to the use of
water, as may be prescribed;
(k) monitor water quality and implement regulations and
guidelines on catchment protection;
(l) provide technical support to water users associations in
the sub-catchment;
(m) maintain equipment for data capturing;
(n) compile regular reports on activities in the sub-catchment
and submit the reports to the catchment council;
(o) participate in emergency management and preparedness
activities, as may be prescribed;
(p) carry out public awareness campaigns for, and inform the
public on, water resources and environmental
management in cooperation with water users
associations and appropriate authorities and conservancy
authorities;
(q) promote the participation of the community in water
resources management and ensure gender
mainstreaming in the decision making process relating
to the management, development and use of water; and
(r) perform such other functions as may be conferred or
imposed upon it by, or under, this Act.
(2)
In the performance of its functions, a sub-catchment council
may, within the area for which it is constituted, require any permit
holder or license to undertake measures to maintain, in efficient
repair, any water works connected with the permit or licence.
(3)
Any permit holder or licensee who is aggrieved by a
requirement of a sub-catchment council, made under subsection
(2), may, within thirty days of the request, appeal to the catchment
council or the Authority, where no catchment council exists.
(4)
If any person fails to comply with a requirement, under
subsection (2), which has not been set aside by the catchment
council or the Authority, the sub-catchment council may itself
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 293


--- PAGE 30 ---

undertake such measures as it considers necessary to maintain
any water works and shall recover the costs of doing so with any
prescribed interest, on the costs incurred, from the permit holder or
licensee.
21.
(1) The Authority shall, for the day-to-day management
and administration of a catchment and sub-catchment,  appoint a
catchment manager for each catchment and other staff that are
necessary for the effective performance of the functions of a
catchment council, sub-catchment council and water users
association.
(2)
A catchment manager and the other staff, appointed under
subsection (1), shall be employees of the Authority under its terms
and conditions of service and but shall act under the direction of a
catchment council or sub-catchment council but under the general
supervision of the Authority.
(3)
A catchment council, sub-catchment council or water users
association may delegate to the catchment manager or any other
employee of the Authority, appointed under subsection (1), any of
its functions under this Act or as may be prescribed.
22.
Subject to this Act, a catchment manager may, where the
catchment council or sub-catchment council has not been
constituted by the Minister or is unable to meet—
(a) cause any investigation, as may be prescribed, to be carried
out;
(b) authorise an applicant to withdraw an application on any
matter, on any conditions set out in guidelines issued by
the Board, including the payment of prescribed fees for
any costs incurred as a result of such withdrawal as the
catchment manager considers necessary; or
(c) submit any application on any matter or other issue, pending
consideration by a catchment council or sub-catchment
council, to the Director-General for consideration in
accordance with this Act.
23.
(1) A catchment manager shall collect, and issue a receipt
for, in the prescribed manner,  all charges payable for the use of
water in the catchment or sub-catchment and transmit the charges
to the Authority.
294
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Catchment
manager and
other staff
General
functions of
catchment
manager
Collection of
charges


--- PAGE 31 ---

(2)
A receipt issued under subsection (1), shall not in anyway
be a permit or licence for the right to use water.
24. 
(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, by statutory instrument, constitute a water users
association for any area of a catchment.
(2)
The members of a water users association shall be
nominated, in accordance with prescribed criteria, by the users of
water, an appropriate authority, a conservancy authority, a local
authority or a traditional authority, in the area of the catchment.
(3)
The Minister shall appoint the members of a water users
association, as nominated under subsection (2), in accordance with
the prescribed criteria.
(4)
The Minister shall, in the statutory instrument, made under
subsection (1), specify—
(a) the name of the water users association;
(b) the number of members that will constitute the water
users association, not exceeding ten members;
(c) the area of a catchment in which the water users
association shall operate;
(d) such other functions related to the management of the
water resource in the area under the jurisdiction of the
water users association not specified under section
twenty five;
(e) matters relating to the management of the water users
association, establishment of, and election of members
to, a management committee and their tenure of office,
the holding of annual general meetings and other
meetings of the association,  annual plans and budgets
of the water users association, finances and financial
records, annual reports and technical and other support
to the water users association; and
(f) the manner in which the water users association shall
operate.
25.
A water users association shall, in the area of a catchment
in which it operates and for purposes of the water resources in that
area—
(a) undertake projects that will ensure catchment protection;
(b) monitor water quality and ensure water resources
conservation;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
295
Functions of
water users
association
Constitution
of water
users
association


--- PAGE 32 ---

(c) collect hydrological, hydro-geological, meteorological,
environmental, socio-economic and water quality and
quantity data for submission to the sub-catchment council;
(d) facilitate inspections under this Act;
(e) promote the participation of the community in water
resources management and ensure gender
mainstreaming in the decision-making process relating
to the use of water;
(f) investigate and deal with disputes relating to the use of
water, as may be prescribed;
(g) propose local water management plans to the
subcatchment council and implement the plans; and
(h) perform any other function assigned to the association by
the sub-catchment council or as may be prescribed.
PART IV
WATER RESOURCES PLANNING
26.
The Minister shall, for purposes of this Act—
(a) ensure that the Authority equitably and efficiently allocates
water resources for the development of all sectors of
the economy, including the rural and peri-urban areas;
(b) ensure that the Authority provides access to water
resources of acceptable quantity and quality;
(c) give effect to any international or regional agreement or
declaration, to which Zambia is a party, on, or which
mentions, shared water resources and water courses, in
a spirit of mutual co-operation;
(d) ensure that the Authority puts in place adaptive measures
for climate change in collaboration with appropriate and
conservancy authorities;
(e) ensure that research is carried out, and information is
obtained and kept, by the Authority on hydrological and
hydro-geological matters such as—
(i) the quality and quantity of Zambia’s water
resources;
(ii) the utilisation of Zambia’s water resources; and
(iii) resources needed to develop Zambia’s water
resources sufficient to meet the needs of the
nation; and
(f) mobilise resources for the development, management and
conservation of water resources in the public interest.
296
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
General
functions of
Minister


--- PAGE 33 ---

27.
(1) The Public Service Commission shall appoint a public
officer as Director responsible for water resources planning and
policy development.
(2)
The Director shall, for the purposes of this Act, advise the
Minister on the—
(a) development of policies for the efficient and effective
integrated planning and optimum development, utilisation
and protection of Zambia’s water resources, in the public
interest; and
(b) mainstreaming of gender into the policies, programmes
and activities relating to water resource management
development and use.
28.
(1) The Minister shall, by statutory instrument, designate
the six catchments of Zambia.
(2)
The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority,
by statutory instrument, designate, for the purposes of this Act, any
area as a subcatchment.
(3)
A catchment or sub-catchment designated under this section
may lie wholly or partly within a local authority.
(4)
A catchment and sub-catchment shall, subject to this Act,
be under the control of a catchment council or sub-catchment
council, as the case may be, and under the general supervision and
direction of the Authority.
29.
(1) Where the Board is satisfied that special measures
are necessary for the protection of a catchment, sub-catchment or
geographic area, it may, after consulting any appropriate authority
or conservancy authority, operating within the catchment or sub-
catchment, recommend to the Minister that the catchment, sub-
catchment or geographic area be declared a water resource
protection area.
(2)
The Minister may, on receiving a recommendation under
subsection (1), declare, by statutory notice, a catchment, sub-
catchment or geographic area to be a water resource protection
area.
(3)
The Minister may, in a statutory notice issued under
subsection (2)—
(a) impose any requirement and regulate or prohibit any
conduct or activity in relation to a water resource
protection area as may be considered necessary for the
protection of the area and its water resources; and
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 297
Appointment
of Director
responsible
for water
resources
planning and
policy
development
Designation
of catchment
and sub-
catchment
Water
resource
protection
area


--- PAGE 34 ---

(b) make different requirements and regulate or prohibit
different conduct or activities in different water resource
protection area.
(4)
The powers conferred on the Minister under this section
shall not extend to areas declared, or which may be declared, as
protected areas under any other written law.
30.
Without limiting the generality of the functions of the
Authority, in considering, formulating and implementing any proposal
for the use, management, development or exploration of any water
resource, the Board shall—
(a) ensure the protection, conservation and sustenance of the
environment;
(b) take into account the regulations, standards and guidelines
issued by, or under, the Environmental Management Act,
2011, and the Standards Act;
(c) ensure that an environmental impact assessment is carried
out, where necessary, in accordance with the
Environmental Management Act, 2011;
(d) respect any national heritage site or monument declared
under the National Heritage Conservation Commission
Act;
(e) collaborate with the appropriate authorities responsible
for wildlife, natural resources, tourism and forestry; and
(f) ensure the right of access by members of the public to
places of leisure, recreation or any natural beauty related
to  a water resource.
31.
(1) The Authority shall, following public consultation, and
in collaboration with the appropriate authorities and conservancy
authorities, formulate a national water resources strategy and plan
for the management, use, development, conservation, preservation,
protection, control and regulation of water resources.
(2)
The Authority shall periodically review and update the
national water resources strategy and plan.
(3)
The national water resources strategy and plan shall—
(a) take into account the resource  quality objectives;
(b) set out the principles, objectives, procedures and
institutional arrangements of the Authority for the
management, use, development, conservation,
preservation,  control and regulation of water resources
within each catchment, including possible financing
requirements;
298
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Consistency
of water
resources
management
with
environmental
and national
heritage
protection
National
water
resources
strategy and
plan
Act No. 12
of 2011
Cap. 416
Act No. 12
of 2011
Cap. 173


--- PAGE 35 ---

(c) contain water allocation plans which set out the principles
for allocating water, taking into account the reserve;
(d) provide mechanisms and facilities for enabling the public
and communities, in particular women, to participate in
managing the water resources within each catchment;
and
(e) generally contain measures to avert environmental
degradation, such as desertification, deforestation,
erosion, sedimentation, toxic waste and the aftermath
of the use of unsuitable agro-chemical products.
(4)
The national water resources strategy and plan shall be
submitted to the Minister for approval and thereafter the Authority
shall publish the strategy and plan in the Gazette, a daily newspaper
circulating in Zambia and a newsletter issued by the Authority,
catchment council, sub-catchment council or water users
association.
(5)
The Minister, the Authority, an appropriate authority and a
conservancy authority shall, when exercising any power or
performing any function under this Act or any other law, take into
account, and give effect to, the national water resources strategy
and plan.
32.
(1) For the purposes of ensuring the optimum management,
development and utilisation of Zambia’s water resources, a
catchment council shall prepare, in collaboration with the Authority,
a catchment management plan.
(2)
A catchment council and the Authority shall, in preparing a
catchment management plan—
(a) consult any appropriate authority, conservancy authority
and any other stakeholders who are likely to be
concerned with the development, conservation,
preservation or protection of the catchment or sub-
catchment and the utilisation of the water resources;
(b) take into account subcatchment and local water
management plans  proposed by the sub-catchment
councils and water users associations, respectively;
(c) draw up an inventory of the water resources of the
catchment or sub-catchment; and
(d) have regard to any relevant plan prepared under the Town
and Country Planning Act and to such other matters as
may be relevant.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
299
Catchment
management
plan
Cap. 283


--- PAGE 36 ---

33.
The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority,
by statutory instrument, specify what a catchment management
plan should contain, including any diagrams, illustrations and maps
which shall accompany the plan.
34.
The Minister shall prescribe—
(a) the manner in which any objections or representations to
a catchment management plan are to be made and the
period within which they are to be made to the Authority;
(b) the process for handling any objections or representations;
(c) the procedure and manner for effecting any changes to
the catchment management plan; and
(d) the publication of a final catchment management plan.
35.
(1) The Board shall approve a catchment management
plan within thirty days of its finalisation.
(2)
The Board shall notify the public, in the Gazette, a daily
newspaper circulating in Zambia  and a newsletter issued by the
Authority, catchment council, sub-catchment council or water users
association, of the approval of a catchment management plan and
of the date on which the plan shall come into operation.
36.
Any person, the Government, any appropriate authority or
conservancy authority undertaking natural resources management
or any development within any catchment shall, in so doing, have
regard to the catchment management plan relating to the catchment.
37.
The Board shall, within a period of not more than five
years from the date on which a catchment management plan came
into operation or such other period as the Minister may prescribe
and thereafter at intervals of not more than five years or such
other intervals, as the Minister may prescribe, review the catchment
management plan and decide whether or not a new catchment
management plan should be prepared under this Act.
38.
(1) The Authority shall put in place and maintain a gender
sensitive integrated national management, monitoring and
information system on water resources as may be prescribed by
the Minister.
(2)
The Minister shall, in prescribing the system referred to
under subsection (1), provide for the—
(a) procedures for the collection and management of data
and information regarding water resources and their
management, use and development;
300
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Contents of
catchment
management
plan
Publication
of catchment
management
plan
Approval of
catchment
management
plan
Effect of
catchment
management
plan
National
monitoring
and
information
system
Review of
catchment
management


--- PAGE 37 ---

(b) procedures for gathering data and the analysis and
dissemination of data and information on water
resources; and
(c) the integration of the national management, monitoring
and information system with the systems of relevant
appropriate and conservancy authorities.
(3)
For the purposes of any system established under this
section, the Authority shall consult and collaborate with any
appropriate authority or conservancy authority operating within a
catchment or sub-catchment.
(4)
For the purposes of any system established under this
section, the Board may, in writing, require any person, appropriate
authority or conservancy authority, within a reasonable time or on
a regular basis, to provide it with specified information, documents,
samples or materials.
(5)
The Authority shall issue guidelines to catchment councils,
sub-catchment councils, water users associations, appropriate
authorities and conservancy authorities on the keeping of records
and the furnishing of information or returns to the Authority as may
be prescribed.
(6)
Any person, appropriate authority or conservancy authority
shall, on payment of a prescribed fee—
(a) have access to information contained in any national
management, monitoring and information system; and
(b) be supplied with a copy of any data or information.
39.
(1)
The Authority may establish hydrological stations for
the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act.
(2)
Where the Authority—
(a) wishes to construct or maintain a hydrological station on
any land; and
(b) is unable to agree on reasonable terms with the occupier;
the Authority shall recommend the compulsory acquisition of the
land in accordance with section forty-one.
40.
The Authority may, so far as is reasonably practicable,
enter into and maintain such arrangements, including memorandum
of understanding and joint catchment management plans, with a
utility, appropriate authority or conservancy authority for—
(a) securing the proper management of any water resource;
and
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 301
Establishment
of
hydrological
stations
Arrangement
with utility,
appropriate
or
conservancy
authority


--- PAGE 38 ---

(b) the construction or installation of any water works or the
drilling of any borehole which the utility, appropriate
authority or conservancy authority require for carrying
out their functions.
41.
The President may, by statutory order, on the
recommendation of the Board, acquire any land, in accordance
with the Lands Acquisition Act, for the purposes of, or in connection
with, the carrying out of the functions of the Authority under this
Act.
42.
(1) The Minister may, after consultation with the Authority,
the local authorities within a catchment and the Minister responsible
for local government and after considering the financial, human
and technical resources available to the local authority, by notice in
the Gazette and in a daily newspaper  of  general circulation in
Zambia—
(a) authorise the delegation, by the Authority, of any of the
functions of a catchment council or sub-catchment
council to the local authority, subject to such conditions
as the Minister may impose; and
(b) amend or withdraw the functions delegated to the local
authority under paragraph (a).
(2)
The Authority may, after consultation with the water users
associations in a catchment, by notice in the Gazette and in a daily
newspaper of general circulation in Zambia, delegate to any utility,
appropriate authority or conservancy authority any of the functions
of a catchment council or sub-catchment council, subject to such
conditions as the Board may impose.
PART V
WATER QUANTITY AND QUALITY MANAGEMENT
43.
(1) The Authority shall, where it is appropriate to do so,
and after consultations with any appropriate authority or
conservancy authority operating within a catchment, specify the
environmental flow, level or volume of any water resource, taking
into consideration any relevant use of the water.
(2)
Where the Authority makes a specification, under subsection
(1), it shall set out—
(a) the control points at which the flow, level or volume in the
water is to be measured;
302
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Compulsory
acquisition
of land
Delegation of
functions to
local
authorities
and other
authorities
Environmental
flow, level or
volume of
water
resource
Cap. 189


--- PAGE 39 ---

(b) the method of measurement which is to be used at each
control point; and
(c) the flow, level or volume which is to be the environmental
flow, level or volume at each control point or, where
appropriate, the acceptable flow, level or volume at each
control point for different areas, times and periods.
(3)
The Authority shall provide—
(a) on request by any interested person, such information
relating to the flow, level or volume of any water
resource;
(b) reasonable facilities for the inspection by any interested
person of any records dealing with the flow, level or
volume of any water resource; and
(c) the taking for the making of copies of, or extracts from,
any records, upon payment of the prescribed fee.
44.
(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), the Minister shall,
on the recommendation of the Authority, by notice in the Gazette
and in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Zambia, specify
the reserve for all or part of a water resource.
(2)
A determination of the reserve shall ensure that adequate
allowance is made for each component of the reserve.
(3)
The Minister shall, before determining and specifying the
reserve under subsection (1)—
(a) publish a notice, in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper
of general circulation in Zambia—
(i) setting out the proposed reserve; and
(ii) inviting written comments to be submitted, on the
proposed reserve, and specifying an address to
which, and a date before which, comments are
to be submitted, which date may not be earlier
than sixty days after publication of the notice;
and
(b) consider all comments received within the date specified
in paragraph (a).
(4)
A person, the Government, the Authority, appropriate
authority and conservancy authority shall observe the reserve as
specified under this section when exercising any power or
performing any duty under this Act.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
303
Reserve


--- PAGE 40 ---

45.
(1) The Authority shall develop water conservation
management practices that minimise waste of water, encourage
sustainable and efficient use of water and improve the quality of
water.
(2)
A user of water shall comply with the water conservation
management practices developed under subsection (1).
(3)
Where a user of water is failing or fails to comply with the
water conservation management practices, developed under
subsection (1), the Director-General shall give the user a period of
thirty days within which to put in measures to enable the user comply.
(4)
Where a user of water fails to comply with the water
conservation management practices, within the period specified
under subsection (3), the Director-General may, after giving the
user a hearing on the matter, impose any of the following:
(a) suspend or cancel the permit;
(b) impose monitoring requirements, including water saving
devices;
(c) prosecute the user for an offence under paragraph (g) of
section one hundred and sixty four; or
(d) take such other measures as the Director-General
considers appropriate in the circumstances.
(5)
A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Director-
General, made under subsection (3) or (4), may appeal to the Board
against the decision.
46.
(1) A person shall not use any water for purposes of diluting
any effluents without a permit issued under this Act.
(2)
A person, trade or industrial undertaking who or which, as
the case may be, wishes to discharge any effluent into a water
resource shall do so in accordance with the Environmental
Management Act, 2011.
(3)
A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable to the general penalty specified under section
one hundred and seventy two.
47.
(1) The Authority shall, in collaboration with the
Environmental Agency, recommend to the Zambia Bureau of
Standards ambient water quality standards and ensure that the
standards are maintained.
(2)
The Authority shall, in collaboration with the Environmental
Agency, monitor the resource quality and control the pollution of
any water resource.
304
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Water
conservation
management
practise
Diluting
effluent and
discharge
into water
resource
Act No. of
2011
Ambient
standards,
resource
quality
monitoring
and pollution
control


--- PAGE 41 ---

48.
(1) Notwithstanding the Environmental Management Act,
2011,  where any person discharges or disposes of—
(a) any organic or inorganic matter, including water containing
such matter, into a water resource, whether directly or
through drainage or seepage, so as to cause pollution of
the water resource; or
(b) any effluent or waste water which has been produced by,
or results from, the use of water for any purpose, into a
water resource, whether directly or through drainage or
seepage;
that person commits an offence, whether or not that person acted
intentionally, and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding
one hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a period
not exceeding one year, or to both.
(2)
Where a person is convicted of an offence, under subsection
(1), but proves that due care and all reasonable steps necessary to
prevent the discharge or disposal referred to in that subsection
were taken, the court shall take that fact into account in the
assessment of the sentence to be passed on that person.
(3)
In addition to any penalty imposed, under subsection (1),
the court may order the person concerned to—
(a) take such remedial action, specified by the court, on the
advice of the Authority, as may be necessary;
(b) reimburse the Authority for any remedial action taken by
it; and
(c) pay compensation for any damage caused.
49.
(1) Where the Authority, after consultation with the
Environmental Agency, is satisfied that the activities of any person
may lead or give rise to the pollution of a water resource, the Authority
may, by notice in writing, require the person to take such measures,
within a specified period as it may direct in the circumstances,
including all or any of the following:
(a) ascertain as to whether the water is drinkable or not;
(b) the installation of devices to test and monitor the quality
and quantity of gases, liquids or solids in any water,
effluent or waste water;
(c) the sinking of boreholes to test and monitor the quality
and quantity of  ground water;
(d) the provision of facilities for the taking of samples by the
Authority;
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
305
Pollution of
water
resources
Act No.    of
2011
Steps to
control or
prevent
water
pollution


--- PAGE 42 ---

(e) the testing or monitoring of any water, effluent or waste
water and the submission to the Authority of the results
of such testing and monitoring;
(f) the taking of reasonable measures for the control or
prevention of pollution;
(g) the construction or installation of water works or devices
for the control or prevention of pollution; or
(h) the preparation and submission to the Authority of a report
giving information concerning that person’s existing or
proposed activities.
(2)
Subject to subsection (3), a person who, without reasonable
excuse, fails to comply with a requirement, made under subsection
(1), commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding one year, or to both.
(3)
In addition to any penalty imposed under subsection (2),
the court may order the person concerned to—
(a) take any remedial action, specified by the court, on the
advice of the Authority, as may be necessary;
(b) reimburse the Authority for any remedial action taken by
it; and
(c) pay compensation for any damage caused.
(4)
A person who is aggrieved by a requirement to take any
measures, requested, under subsection (1), may appeal to the
Minister within thirty days of the directive of the Authority.
50.
(1) The Authority and the Environmental Agency shall
establish resource quality objectives for any water resource and
shall publish the objectives in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper
of general circulation in Zambia.
(2)
The Authority and the Environmental Agency shall, where
establishing resource quality objectives for any water resource under
subsection (1), do so in accordance with the following criterion:
(a) general requirements as to the purposes for which the
water shall be suitable;
(b) specific requirements as to the substances that are to be
present in, or absent from, the water and as to the
concentrations of substances which are, or are required
to be, present in the water; and
(c) specific requirements as to the other characteristics of
the water resource.
306
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Resource
quality
objectives


--- PAGE 43 ---

PART VI
WATER SHORTAGE AREAS
51.
(1) The Minister may, on the recommendation of the
Authority, after the Authority has consulted any relevant catchment
council and conservancy authority, by notice in the Gazette and in
a daily newspaper of general circulation in Zambia or a newsletter
issued by the Authority, catchment council, sub-catchment council
or water users association, declare any area as a water shortage
area, where  the Minister is satisfied  that there is a need to mobilise
water resources due to any of the following factors:
(a) the flow of water in any water resources in the area have
fallen or is are likely to fall below the normal flow of the
water resource as prescribed;
(b) the flow of water or the level of water in any water storage
works in the area has fallen or is likely to fall below the
level specified in the permits;
(c) the abstraction of water from any boreholes in any the
area is likely to diminish, unduly, the ground water
resources in the area or affect adversely the flow of
any surface water in any water resource; or
(d) certain circumstances have brought about a shortage of
water in the area.
(2)
The Minister may, in consultation with the Authority, by
notice in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper of general circulation
in Zambia or a newsletter issued by the Authority, catchment
council, sub-catchment council or water users association, cancel
a declaration, made under subsection (1), where the need for such
a declaration is no longer necessary.
52.
(1) Notwithstanding any other law, in particular the Lands
Act, or this Act, and subject to subsections (2) and (7), the Board
may, in consultation with a catchment council, in respect of a water
shortage area —
(a) suspend or amend any permit;
(b) make orders in relation to the use of any water;
(c) with the consent of the Minister and the traditional authority,
where the area falls within customary land as provided
in the Lands Act, enter or authorise any other person to
enter on any land for the purpose of—
(i) using water from any water works, borehole, mine
or quarry on the land;
(ii) sinking boreholes on the land and using water from
the boreholes; and
(iii) conserving the water.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
307
Declaration
of water
shortage
areas
Powers of
Authority in
water
shortage
areas
Cap. 184
Cap. 184


--- PAGE 44 ---

(2)
Where the Board exercises any power under paragraph
(c) of subsection (1), the Board shall pay compensation to the
occupier of the land, as may be prescribed by the Minister, by
statutory instrument.
(3)
The Board shall, in consultation with a catchment council,
determine the priority in the use of water in a water shortage area,
except that the following purposes shall have priority in that order:
(a) domestic and noncommercial purposes;
(b) environmental purposes;
(c) municipal purposes; and
(d) agricultural purposes.
(4)
For the purposes of paragraph (c) of subsection (3), a utility
or any person that supplies water for municipal purposes shall pay
compensation to any permit holder who may be prejudiced by the
use of water for municipal purposes, at such amount as may be
mutually agreed on or failing such agreement as may be determined
by arbitration.
(5)
The priority of use stipulated under subsection (3) shall be
secured against any encroachment, demarcation or interference
by water permits subsequently granted to any other person and the
Authority shall not grant any subsequent permits to use water in
the water shortage area except on payment of compensation to
those permit holders having priority of use under subsection (3).
(6)
Any action taken or authorisation given under subsection
(1) shall lapse—
(a) after such period as the Board may determine; or
(b) on the cancellation of the declaration made under
subsection (1).
(7)
Any borehole drilled or other water works constructed
during a water shortage period on any occupier’s land in the water
shortage area shall, after the cancellation of the declaration as
specified under section fifty-one, be transferred to that occupier,
except that where the Minister declares that area as a water
shortage area, no further compensation shall be paid to that occupier
of land for the exercise of any power under subparagraphs (i) and
(ii) of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) in respect of the borehole or
other water works .
(8)
The Board shall not delegate any of its powers under this
section to any person or body.
(9)
A person who is aggrieved with any decision of the Board
made under this section may appeal to the Minister within thirty
days of the decision of the Board.
308
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 45 ---

53.
(1) A person shall not, in a water shortage area, sink,
deepen or alter a borehole for any purpose before obtaining a permit.
(2)
Subject to this Act, a person shall apply to the Authority for
a permit to sink, deepen or alter a borehole for any purpose in
accordance with Part IX.
(3)
Part IX shall apply, with the necessary modifications, to a
permit for the sinking, altering or deepening of a borehole for any
purpose.
(4)
A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding two
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years, or to both.
54.
(1) The Board may, subject to section fifty two and
subsections (6), (7) and (8) and on the recommendation of a
catchment council, by notice in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper
of general circulation in Zambia or a newsletter, fix a maximum
volume of water which may be abstracted from any water resource
or water storage works and the maximum rate per month at which
water may be abstracted from any borehole or any water storage
works in a water shortage area.
(2)
The rate or volume of water to be abstracted, as provided
under subsection (1), may be fixed in relation to the area of land
occupied by any person in the water shortage area or to any other
circumstance which the Board considers relevant to the fixing of
the rate or volume of water to be abstracted.
(3)
Subject to subsections (5) and (6), a person shall not, after
the publication of the notice referred to in subsection (1), in any
month, abstract water from any water resource, water storage
works or borehole, in a water shortage area, at a rate exceeding
the maximum rate fixed under subsection (1).
(4)
A catchment council may cause an investigation to be
undertaken on the use being made of water in a water shortage
area and may, after having given the occupier of land, on which the
water resource, borehole or water storage works is located, not
less than seven days’ notice of its intention to do so, recommend to
the Authority the amendment of the conditions or the suspension of
any permit or licence.
(5)
A person who—
(a) uses or intends to use water within a water shortage area
for the purpose of that person’s occupation or trade; or
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
309
Sinking,
deepening or
altering
boreholes in
water
shortage
areas
restricted
Maximum
volume and
rate of
abstraction
in water
shortage
areas


--- PAGE 46 ---

(b) has carried out water conservation measures or water
works, the nature and extent of which are approved by
a catchment council and which are likely to result in an
improvement in the water resources in a water shortage
area;
may apply to the Authority for a permit to use water within the
water shortage area at a rate higher than the maximum rate fixed
under subsection (1).
(6)
A local authority, a utility or person supplying water for
municipal purposes may, if part of the area under its jurisdiction is
within a water shortage area, apply to the Authority for a permit to
use water within a water shortage area at a rate higher than the
maximum rate fixed under subsection (1).
(7)
The Director-General may, on an application made under
subsection (5) or (6)—
(a) grant a permit authorising the use of water at a rate higher
than the maximum rate fixed under subsection (1),
subject to such conditions as the Board may impose; or
(b) reject the application and give reasons for so rejecting.
(8)
A person who is aggrieved with—
(a) the maximum rate of abstraction of water fixed under
subsection (1) may, within a period of thirty days from
the date of publication of the notice referred to in that
subsection, appeal to the  Minister; or
(b) any decision of the Director-General made under
subsection (7) may, within a period of thirty days from
the date of the decision, appeal to the  Board.
(9)
On an appeal under subsection (8) relating to—
(a) the maximum rate of abstraction of water, fixed under
subsection (1), the Minister may direct the Board to
amend the rate or confirm it; or
(b) any decision of the Director-General under subsection
(7), the Board may direct the Director-General to—
(i) grant or re-issue the permit applied for, subject to
such conditions as the Board may specify in
the direction; or
(ii) set aside the appeal.
(10)
A person who contravenes subsection (3), commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding two
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years, or to both.
310
No. 21of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 47 ---

PART VII
MANAGEMENT OF SHARED WATER COURSES AND WATER RESOURCES
55.
(1) Notwithstanding subsection (2), the Government shall
protect Zambia’s territorial sovereignty over its water resources.
(2)
Without prejudice to the rights and obligations arising from
any other treaty, convention, agreement or declaration relating to
shared water resources to which Zambia is a State Party, the
Government shall uphold such basic principles and rules of
international law as are reflected in the treaties, conventions,
declarations and agreements listed in Part 1 of the Third Schedule
and as provided under this Part.
56.
(1) Subject to the Constitution and this Act and
notwithstanding any other law, the Ministry responsible for water
resources may, on behalf of the Government—
(a) enter into bilateral or multilateral agreements with any
foreign State or government relating to any shared water
resource;
(b) in cooperation with other riparian States, develop legal
instruments, on the advice of the Authority and any
appropriate authority, that may be required to protect
and conserve the water resource and for the—
(i) use of water;
(ii) monitoring and control of pollution and its effects
in any shared water resource;
(iii) the putting into place of adaptation measures to
deal with climate change; and
(iv) control of longrange  transport of pollution;
(c) on the advice of the Director—
(i) establish or strengthen research and development
programmes at sub-regional, regional and
international levels in support of water resource
assessment activities and climate change and
monitor such research and development to
ensure that they are appropriate for the needs
of Zambia; and
(ii) set up mechanisms for the sharing of appropriate
knowledge and technology for the collection of
data and the implementation of planned
development; and
Water Resources Management   
     [No. 21 of 2011
311
Strategy on
management
of shared
water
resources
Cooperation
over shared
water
resources
Cap. 1


--- PAGE 48 ---

(d) in cooperation with other riparian States, and in consultation
with the Authority, formulate water resources strategies,
prepare joint water resources management plans and,
where appropriate, harmonise their strategies and plans
with national strategies and plans.
57.
(1) The Minister may, on the advice of the Director, do
any of the following in relation to the management of shared water
resources:
(a) establish national mechanisms for dispute resolution
regarding shared water resources;
(b) promote and ensure stakeholder participation, as part of
Government’s decision support system, in the
management of shared water resources; and
(c) facilitate the building of appropriate capacity for
negotiations of shared water resources agreements as
well as participation in institutions established under
section fifty eight to deal with shared water resources.
(2)
The Minister shall ensure that any agreement entered into,
under section fifty six, protects Zambia’s sovereignty and adequately
operationalises the principles of equitable, reasonable and sustainable
utilisation of shared water resources by taking into account the
following:
(a) geographical, hydrographic, hydrological, hydro-geological,
climatic and climate change, ecological and other factors
of a natural character;
(b) the social and economic needs of Zambia;
(c) the people who are dependent on the water resources,
including their health and safety;
(d) existing and potential uses of the water resource;
(e) economy of use of the water resource;
(f) the prevention, reduction and control of pollution of the
water resource;
(g) the protection and preservation of the aquatic environment;
(h) the regulation of the flows and levels of the waters of the
watercourses and other water resources; and
(i) the protection, preservation, conservation and development
of the water resource and its ecosystems.
(3)
The Minister may delegate any of the functions, specified
under subsection (2), in writing, to the Authority.
312
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Powers and
duties of
Minister on
management
of shared
water
resources


--- PAGE 49 ---

58.
Any agreement entered into by the Government, under
section fifty-six, may establish an institution to implement the
agreement in collaboration with the Authority and in particular to—
(a) investigate, manage, monitor and protect the watercourse;
(b) foster regional cooperation over the watercourse;
(c) acquire, construct, alter, operate or maintain any water
works; or
(d) allocate, use and supply water from the watercourse.
59.
The institutions listed in Part II of the Third Schedule shall
be institutions contemplated under section fifty eight, except that
they shall continue to function as provided under existing agreements
until such time as the State Parties revise their functions and
operations to comply with this Act.
PART VIII
WATER USE
60.
(1) The use of water shall—
(a) maximise the social and economic benefits to the
community;
(b) be consistent with the principles specified under section
six; and
(c) avoid or minimise the adverse impact of that use on other
users of water.
(2)
Subject to this Act, water may be used for the following
purposes:
(a) domestic or non-commercial purposes;
(b) environmental purposes;
(c) training and research purposes;
(d) municipal purposes;
(e) agricultural purposes;
(f) industrial purposes;
(g) hydro-electric purposes;
(h) mining purposes;
(i) navigational purposes;
(j) supply of water in bulk; and
(k) any other purposes as may be specified by the Board.
(3)
A person who uses water, as specified under subsection
(2), shall comply with any condition, limitation, restriction or
prohibition imposed for that use by, or under, this Act or any other
law.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
313
Establishment
of
institutions
to implement
agreements
Transitional
provisions
for existing
institutions
Uses of
water


--- PAGE 50 ---

61.
(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (4), prioritisation of,
and the process of allocating and classifying water  for various
purposes for inclusion in an allocation plan shall be as follows:
(a) a sub-catchment council shall prepare an allocation plan
for inclusion in a subcatchment management plan as
specified under subsection (3) and (5) and shall submit
the sub-catchment management plan to the catchment
council; and
(b) the catchment council shall include the sub-catchment
management plan in the catchment management plan
and shall submit the plan to the Authority, together with
a compilation of all the allocation plans for the approval
of the Board.
(2)
When classifying water for various purposes a sub-
catchment council shall, in consultation with the water users
associations in the sub-catchment—
(a) determine the development and management priorities of
the sub-catchment;
(b) endeavour to ensure that statutory minimum flows required
for a particular catchment or sub-catchment are taken
into account;
(c) ensure that water reserves are set aside for priority
purposes and environmental needs;
(d) make an assessment of actual or potential effects on the
environment; and
(e) ensure that the following purposes have priority in that
order—
(i) domestic and noncommercial purposes;
(ii) environmental purposes; and
(iii) any other purposes determined by the sub-
catchment council  in order of the  development
and management priorities;
in accordance with the criteria, terms and conditions prescribed by
the Minister under subsection (5).
(3)
An allocation plan and a catchment management plan,
submitted under subsection (1), shall include the following
information:
(a) water committed for the reserve;
(b) the various categories of uses of water in that subcatchment
and catchment;
(c) the prioritisation of the various uses of water as specified
under subsection (2);
314
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Allocation of
water  and
prioritising
its uses


--- PAGE 51 ---

(d) requirements for water within the catchment to satisfy
the needs of existing permit holders;
(e) the effect of climate change or variability on the availability
of water;
(f) the adjustment to entitlements given for the use of water
in case there is a reduction in the availability of water;
and
(g) water storage works existing or that are being, or are to
be, constructed in the catchment.
(4)
The Board shall, subject to the national water resources
strategy and plan and this Act, on receipt of a catchment
management plan submitted under subsection (1), determine the—
(a) quantity of water to be allocated for the various uses of
water; or
(b) purpose for, or manner in which, the water shall be used;
taking into account the recommendations made, and
factors specified, in the allocation plan and the water
available in the resource that is required for —
(i) the reserve;
(ii) any regional and international obligation; and
(iii) municipal purposes, agricultural purposes, mining
purposes, hydroelectric purposes and industrial
purposes.
(5)
Subject to this Act, the Minister, on the recommendation of
the Authority and a catchment council may prescribe—
(a) the matters which shall be taken into account in considering
the respective priority of different uses of water;
(b) the manner of allocating water between users who have
competing needs for water;
(c) the limitations in terms of cubic metres that may be
abstracted for any category of use as specified under
section sixty;
(d) the methods of allocating water; and
(e) the detailed processes and procedures, subject to
subsection (1), relating to the classification and allocation
of water in a subcatchment and under a water users
association.
(6)
Notwithstanding subsections (1),(4) and (5), the Authority
shall not allocate any water in a customary area without first
consulting the traditional authority in that area and taking into
consideration the local customs and practices which are beneficial
to water resources management.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
315


--- PAGE 52 ---

62.
(1) Subject to this Act, any person may use water for
domestic and non-commercial purposes, except that such use shall
not be construed as conferring on that person a right, which that
person would not otherwise possess, to enter or occupy any land
for the purposes of using any water.
(2)
A person shall not require a permit for the use of water for
domestic and non-commercial purposes, except as otherwise
provided under this Act.
(3)
Notwithstanding subsection (2) and section seventy, any
person who intends to construct water storage works, above a
prescribed limit, on a water resource for domestic and non-
commercial purposes shall obtain a permit under Part IX.
(4)
A person who intends to construct water storage works
for domestic and non-commercial purposes, under subsection (3),
shall, in writing, notify the catchment council,  sub-catchment council
and every occupier of riparian land which is contiguous to the
proposed water storage works—
(a) of the intention to construct the proposed water storage
works; and
(b) that such occupier may, on payment of an agreed
proportion of the cost of construction and maintenance
of the proposed water storage works, participate in their
benefit.
63.
A person who intends to apply for a permit to use water
for any purpose, other than for domestic and non-commercial
purposes, in a customary area and that use is likely to substantially
affect the supply of water for domestic and non-commercial
purposes for the occupants of that customary area, that person
shall prior to making an application to the Director-General—
(a) obtain approval of the traditional authority in that area;
and
(b) put in place alternative means for securing water for
domestic purpose.
64.
(1) Notwithstanding this Act, a person may, after obtaining
a temporary permit from the Director-General, as specified under
section seventy-five, construct or extend any water works or install
any machinery, for the purpose of  paragraphs (d) and (e) of section
seventy, or where it is necessary to carry out preliminary work
prior to the use, diversion or construction of water works.
316
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Use of water
for domestic
purposes
domestic and
non-
commercial
purposes
Water for
domestic
purposes
domestic and
non-
commercial
purposes in
customary
area
Use of
minimum
quantities of
water for
investigating
ground water
and
preliminary
works


--- PAGE 53 ---

(2)
A temporary permit issued for the purposes of subsection
(1) shall not, in any way, impose any liability or obligation on the
Authority for any expenses incurred by any person undertaking
any works under the permit, including a case where the Director-
General does not thereafter issue that person with a permit for the
use of water for purposes of this Act.
65.
(1) The Authority—
(a) shall, where required to do so by the Minister, investigate,
in consultation with a catchment council,  sub-catchment
council or water users association, any use, allocation,
or control of water in any catchment, sub-catchment or
area under the jurisdiction of a water users association,
and report to the Minister; and
(b) may, by public consultation with permit holders, licencees,
traditional authorities, catchment councils, sub-catchment
councils or water users associations, as the case maybe,
investigate any use,  appropriation allocation or control
of water in any catchment.
(2)
Where the Board is satisfied that, as a result of any
investigation, undertaken under subsection (1), there is need to—
(a) grant, cancel or vary any permit or licence; or
(b) take any other appropriate action in the matter;
it shall do so in accordance with this Act.
66.
(1) A person shall not, except with the written consent of
the Director-General—
(a) cause any water to run to waste from any water works,
except for the purpose of testing the quantity, quality or
supply of water or the cleaning, disinfecting, examining
or repairing of water works;
(b) use or cause to be used water in excess of that granted
under a permit;
(c) conduct water from any water works or any other source
through any channel or conduit so that water is wasted
between the source and the point of beneficial use; or
(d) use or cause to be used water from any water works
unless such water is carried through pipes fitted with
float valves or other satisfactory means of control to
prevent wastage of the water.
 Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
317
Investigation
of use of
water
Wastage of
water


--- PAGE 54 ---

(2)
The Director-General shall, where the Director-General is
satisfied that a person has contravened this section, give notice to
that person to take such remedial action, as may be specified in the
notice, within thirty days of the notice.
(3)
The Director-General may, where a person fails to comply
with a notice, given under subsection (2), take such measures as
are provided under section forty-five.
67.
(1) A sub-catchment council may request a permit holder
or licensee to—
(a) provide and install a metre or other measuring device for
measuring and recording the amount of water used; and
(b) submit to the sub-catchment council or water users
association, in the prescribed form, annually or at such
intervals as the sub-catchment council or water users
association may require, records indicating the amount
of water used.
(2)
Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Authority may install
or cause to be installed a metre or other measuring device on any
water works belonging to a permit holder or licensee.
(3)
Any officer of the Authority or other person authorised by
a sub-catchment council may inspect any metre or other measuring
device, take readings from it and seal the device in order to prevent
interference with its working.
(4)
Where a person fails to comply with any request, made
under subsection (1), the sub-catchment council shall—
(a) give notice to the permit holder or licensee to comply with
a request made under subsection (1) within thirty days
of the notice; and
(b) take any action provided under section forty-five.
68.
(1)
Subject to subsection (3), the Minister may, on the
recommendation of the Authority, make regulations—
(a) limiting or restricting the purpose, manner or extent of the
use of water;
(b) prescribing the outcome or effect which must be achieved
by the installation and operation of any  water works;
(c) regulating the design, construction, installation, operation
and maintenance of any water works;
318
No. 21of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Records of
amount of
water used
to be
maintained
Regulations
for use of
water


--- PAGE 55 ---

(d) for the various roles and responsibilities of officers, of the
Authority, water users associations,appropriate
authorities and any department or agency of Government
responsible for water resources management and
environmental protection, in the decision making process
relating to water use; or
(e) regulating or prohibiting any activity in order to protect a
water resource or riparian habitat.
(2)
Regulations made under subsection (1) may—
(a) differentiate between different purposes for the use of
water;
(b) make different provisions for different water resources;
(c) differentiate between different geographical areas; and
(d) create offences and prescribe penalties.
(3)
The Minister shall, in making regulations, under subsection
(1), take into account all relevant considerations, including the need
to—
(a) promote the social, economic, sustainable, equitable and
reasonable use of water;
(b) conserve and protect water resourcesor riparian habitat;
(c) provide for adaptive measures for climate change;
(d) prevent wastage of water;
(e) facilitate the monitoring of the use of water and water
resources; and
(f) facilitate the imposition and recovery of charges.
PART IX
PERMITS FOR WATER USE
69.
(1) An appropriate authority shall not issue or grant any
licence, permit or other authorisation for the doing of any activity
by any person, in any catchment or on, or along, a water resource,
before the appropriate authority first consults the Authority as to
whether the issuing or the grant of any licence, permit or other
authorisation will affect the resource quality or quantity of water in
any water resource.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
319
Integrated
decision-
making
process and
single permit
or licence
system


--- PAGE 56 ---

(2)
The Authority may, where consulted under subsection (1),
impose such conditions or stipulate such requirements as the
Authority considers necessary to maintain or protect the resource
quality or quantity of water in any water resource, including
conditions relating to the strict compliance of any other written
law.
(3)
Where the Authority imposes any conditions or stipulates
any requirement under subsection (2), an appropriate authority shall
endorse such condition or requirement on any licence or permit
issued to any person whose activities under the licence or permit
will affect the resource quality or the quantity of water in any
water resource.
(4)
A conservancy authority or an appropriate authority shall,
when requested to do so by the Authority, give to the Authority any
advice or assistance or submit such information as may be
necessary for the performance of the Authority’s functions under
this section.
(5)
Any contravention of any condition or requirement endorsed
on any licence or permit, under subsection (3), shall be a ground
for the revocation of any permit or licence issued by an appropriate
authority under the relevant law.
(6)
A person whose permit or licence authorises the use of
water for a purpose specified in the permit or licence shall pay, to
the appropriate authority that issued the permit or licence, the charge
prescribed under this Act for the use of that water and such permit
or licence shall for all purposes be deemed to be a permit or licence
issued under this Act for the use of the water as specified and shall
be subject to this Act.
(7)
Where a person makes a payment under subsection (6)
for the use of water by that person, the appropriate authority shall
transmit to the Authority the charges paid.
70.
Subject to the requirements, limitations and conditions
specified by, or under, this Act, a permit shall not be required for—
(a) the use of water, from any water resource, for domestic
and non-commercial purposes by a person having lawful
access to it;
(b) the development or use of ground water for domestic and
non-commercial purposes;
(c) the harvest of any rain water from any facility not specified
in paragraph (g) of section seventy-one;
320
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Activities
where no
permits
required


--- PAGE 57 ---

(d) the investigation of the presence of water in any aquifer
of the quality or quantity of ground water; or
(e) ascertaining the effect of using water from any borehole
or water works or the level of water in any other
borehole or water works on any water resource.
71.
Subject to this Act, a person who intends to—
(a) use water for purposes specified under section sixty, other
than for the domestic purposes specified under section
seventy;
(b) construct, acquire any water works, impound, supply or
distribute water from any water works or borehole to
any other person;
(c) de-water any mine, quarry or water works;
(d) drain any swamp, marsh, dambo, wetland, re-charge area
or other land;
(e) construct or acquire any water works for the purpose of
draining into, conserving or utilising, in any manner
whatsoever, water from a water resource;
(f) construct water works necessary to restore the course of
a water resource that has changed its course;
(g) harvest any rainwater by means of a dam, weir or barrage
that is on a water resource;
(h) conduct any operation that would interfere with the bank
or course of a watercourse;
(i) sink, deepen or alter any borehole for any purpose in a
water shortage area; or
(j) carry out any activity in relation to a water resource as
may be prescribed;
shall apply for a permit and pay such charges, for the use of the
water, as may be prescribed.
72.
(1) An application for a permit under section seventy-
one shall be made in the prescribed form and lodged with the
Authority, catchment council,  sub-catchment council or water users
association and be accompanied with—
(a) such information in support of the application as the form
may require; and
(b) a prescribed application fee.
(2)
The Authority, catchment council,  sub-catchment council
or water users association shall, where an application is received
under subsection (1), subject the application to public comment by
a notice in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Zambia and,
where applicable, to an environmental impact assessment in
accordance with the Environmental Management Act, 2011.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
321
Activities
where
permits
required
Application
for permit
Act No. 12
of 2011


--- PAGE 58 ---

(3)
Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person holding a permit
or a licence under the Mines and Minerals Development Act, 2008
who requires the use of water for mining purposes, shall make an
application to the Director of Mines, setting out the volume of water
required, the nature of the proposed use and such other information
as may be prescribed.
(4)
The Director of Mines shall cause an inquiry to be made
into the merits of the application, made under subsection (3), and
shall thereafter forward the application with comments and
recommendations to the Director-General, catchment council, sub-
catchment council or water users association for consideration.
(5)
A person opposed to the grant of a permit may object to
the grant of the permit, within thirty days of the notice inviting
comments on an application, in the prescribed manner, to the
Authority, catchment council, sub-catchment council or water users
association.
(6)
Where there are no objections to an application, made under
subsection (1), the decision on the application shall be submitted to
the sub-catchment council for consideration.
(7)
A catchment council shall consider the decision of the sub-
catchment council within thirty days of receipt of the decision and
transmit its decision to the Director-General.
(8)
Where there are objections to an application, made under
subsection (1) or (3)—
(a) the Authority, catchment council, sub-catchment council
or water users association shall consider the objections
and make a decision on the application;
(b) the decision of the water users association shall be sent
to the sub-catchment council for further consideration
and the decision of the sub-catchment council shall be
sent to the catchment council for further consideration;
and
(c) the catchment council shall submit all decisions received,
including its own decision, to the Director-General for
consideration and determination.
(9)
Where the Authority, catchment council, sub-catchment
council or water users association does not agree with an objection
made, it shall notify the person making the objection within fourteen
days of its decision.
(10)
Where there are no objections to an application made
under subsection (1) or (3)—
322
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Act No. 7 of
2008


--- PAGE 59 ---

(a) the Authority, catchment council, sub-catchment council
or water users association shall consider the application
and make a decision on the application;
(b) the decision of the water users association shall be sent
to the sub-catchment council for further consideration
and the decision of the sub-catchment council shall be
sent to the catchment council for further consideration;
and
(c) the catchment council shall submit all the decisions received,
including its own decision, to the Director-General for
consideration and determination by the Board.
(11)
The period for the consideration of applications for permits
shall be thirty days from the date of receipt of an objection on an
application or the expiry of the notice inviting public comments
where there are no objections.
(12)
A person aggrieved with a decision of the  catchment
council, sub-catchment council or water users association under
subsection (8) may, within thirty days of the decision, appeal to the
Director-General.
73.
(1) The Board shall consider and make a decision on an
application for a permit, as provided under section seventy-four,
as soon as practicable but not later than thirty days from the date it
was lodged with the Authority or received from a catchment council.
(2)
Where an application for a permit is not considered and a
decision made by the Board within thirty days, as specified under
subsection (1), any application fee paid by the applicant shall be
refunded to the applicant and the Board shall immediately proceed
to consider and make a decision on the application which shall be
done in not more than seven days.
(3)
Where the Board still does not consider and decide on an
application for a permit, lodged or submitted under subsection (1),
after the application fee is refunded to the applicant, as provided
under subsection (2), the applicant may appeal to the catchment
council within thirty days of receipt of the refunded application
fee.
74.
Subject to this Act, in particular to the priorities for the use
of water in an allocation plan and a catchment management plan,
the Board shall, on receipt of applications for permits from a
catchment council, before granting a permit—
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
323
Duty to
consider
application
for permit
Consideration
before grant
of permit


--- PAGE 60 ---

(a) identify and take into consideration existing entitlements
to the use of the water;
(b) in the case of more than one application for the use of the
same water, have regard to—
(i) the need to achieve, as far as possible, an equitable
allocation of the available water resources;
(ii) the needs of each application; and
(iii) the likely economic, social and environmental
benefits or effects of the proposed use;
(c) in respect of an application for a permit to construct water
works that are necessary to restore the course of a
water resource, have regard to—
(i) any interests lawfully acquired in the changed
course of the water resource; and
(ii) the extent to which existing permits may be
affected;
(d) have regard to the economic aspects of the proposed
scheme, undertaking or water  works;
(e) if the use will result in effluent requiring treatment and
disposal, order the applicant to ensure that the proposed
method of treatment and disposal of the effluent complies
with Part V;
(f) take into account the resource quality objectives of the
water resource;
(g) take into account the investments already made, and to
be made, by the user of the water in respect of the use
of the water in question;
(h) take into account the strategic importance of the use of
the water applied for;
(i) take into account the quantity of water in the water resource
which may be required for meeting the reserve and any
international obligation;
(j) consider the probable duration of any undertaking or activity
for which the use of water is applied for;
(k) if the application for a permit for the use of water is for
water being beneficially used by a permit holder, consider
the payment of compensation by the applicant to the
permit holder on such terms and conditions as may be
agreed by the parties concerned; and
(l) consider such matters as may appear to be relevant in the
circumstances of each case.
324
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 61 ---

75.
(1)
The Director-General may grant a temporary permit
for the use of water to an applicant, excluding construction of water
works, on such terms and conditions as the Board may specify in
guidelines issued to the Director-General.
(2)
A person shall not commence any works or activities,
specified under sixty four, unless that person applies for a temporary
permit.
(3)
A temporary permit shall authorise the holder to do such
things as are necessary to carry out the works or activities specified
in the temporary permit for the duration of the preliminary works
or activities to be undertaken, but in no case shall its duration exceed
a period of one year.
(4)
A temporary permit issued by the Director-General under
this section shall not oblige the Board to issue a permit for such
works or activities as specified under this Act.
76.
(1) The Board may, subject to this Act, grant a permit for
the use of water within sixty days of a lodgement or submission or
receipt of an application.
(2)
The Board shall grant a permit subject to the following
conditions:
(a) any condition or requirement relating to the use of water
as is specified or required by this Act or as may be
prescribed;
(b) any condition relating to the rate of abstraction of water
as the Board may specify;
(c) the payment by the permit holder of any prescribed charges
for the use of the water on the grant of the permit and
thereafter on an annual basis; or
(d) such other conditions, not inconsistent with this Act, as
the Board may specify in writing.
(3)
Without limiting subsection (2), regulations made by the
Minister, under paragraph (a) of subsection (2), may impose
conditions for different circumstances and for different uses.
77.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), permits for various uses of
water shall not be granted so as to be in force for a period exceeding,
or for periods which in the aggregate exceed, twenty-five years.
(2)
Notwithstanding subsection (1), a permit for hydroelectric
purposes shall be granted for a period not exceeding, or for periods
which in the aggregate do not exceed, thirty years.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
325
Temporary
permit
Grant of
permit and
conditions of
permit
Duration of
permit


--- PAGE 62 ---

78.
If the Board is satisfied that an application does not comply
with, or is contrary to, any regulations made under this Act, the
Board may refuse to grant a permit for the use of water and, in
such a case, the Board shall inform the applicant and any person
objecting to the grant of the application, of the reasons the Board
refused to grant the permit.
79.
(1) Subject to this Act, on the expiry of the period for a
permit, specified in section seventy seven, a permit shall, upon
application by the permit holder, in the prescribed form, be renewed
for a similar period, as long as the applicant has not breached the
conditions of the previous permit and the hydrological conditions
have not substantially changed.
(2)
An application for a renewal of a permit under this section
shall be subject to the same procedure as applies to an application
for a permit under section seventy-two.
(3)
Subject to this Act and in particular subsection (2), an
application for a renewal of a permit, that is valid for at least ten
years, may be made to the Authority, catchment council,  a sub-
catchment council or water users association, three years prior to
its expiration and the Board may grant another permit to the applicant,
for a period not exceeding the periods specified under subsections
(1) and (2) of section seventy-seven, valid from the date of the
renewal.
80.
A permit shall specify, as far as practicable, the particular
portion of any land or the particular undertaking to which the permit
is to be appurtenant and on its grant the permit shall, for the duration
of that permit, and subject to this Act:
(a) be appurtenant to that portion of land or that undertaking;
and
(b) pass with any demise, device, alienation, transfer or other
disposition of the land or undertaking, whether by
operation of law or otherwise.
81.
(1)
A permit may be varied by the Board after  due
investigation by the Authority in the following circumstances:
(a) where it is shown, by any person that, owing to any
emergency as specified under Part XIV, the use of water
under a permit or the method or point of diversion or
other manner in which the water is so used, causes—
(i) inequity; or
(ii) a deterioration in the quality of water;
326
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Refusal of
permit
Renewal of
permit
Permit to run
with land or
undertaking
Variation of
permit


--- PAGE 63 ---

(b) if, after a hydrological survey of the relevant water
resource has been made or due to climate change, there
is a shortage of water for any purpose which has priority
under this Act; or
(c) if the permit holder makes partial use of the permit after
taking into consideration the nature of the investment.
(2)
The Board may vary a permit, under subsection (1), so as
to—
(a) reduce the quantity of water allocated for the purpose;
(b) alter the use of the water specified by the permit;
(c) alter the method of diversion or other specification stipulated
in the permit; or
(d) alter the terms and conditions of the permit so as to effect
the variation.
(3)
A permit shall not be varied under this section unless notice,
of not less than thirty days, of the proposed variation has been
served on the permit holder and the permit holder has been afforded
a reasonable opportunity to show cause to the Board as to why the
permit should not be varied.
(4)
Subsection (3) shall not apply where the variation is
necessary owing to an emergency of a kind provided under Part
XIV.
(5)
Subject to subsection (6), the Board may, in each particular
case, determine whether compensation should be paid, and by whom
it should be paid, to a permit holder who suffers a variation to the
permit.
 (6)
Compensation shall  not be paid under this section in respect
of a variation of a permit to reduce the quantity of water which the
permit holder is authorised to use if the—
(a) Board is satisfied that the variation is necessary in order
to protect the availability of water in the source of supply
to which the permit relates;
(b) variation does not reduce the quantity of water the holder
of the permit is authorised to abstract to less than the
minimum amount required for the use; or
(c) variation is necessary to protect, from serious damage—
(i) any water resource;
(ii) underground water; or
(iii) any ecosystem.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
327


--- PAGE 64 ---

82.
(1) A permit may, at the request of the permit holder, be
varied by the Board so as to—
(a) change the point of diversion or abstraction of the water
used under the permit;
(b) reduce or increase the use of water authorised by the
permit;
(c) allow the apportionment of the water to be apportioned
between two or more parts of the land to which the
permit pertains;
(d) allow the mixture of waters authorised to be taken or
used with those authorised to be taken or used by another
permit, whether held by the same or another permit
holder;
(e) remedy any defect where the permit is incomplete or
indefinite in its terms and conditions; or
(f) alter any term or condition of the permit if the Director-
General is satisfied that the variation is not contrary to
the public interest or the rights of others.
(2)
A variation of a permit, under subsection (1), shall not be
made without undertaking public consultations, if prescribed for
that particular variation.
83.
(1) For the purpose of sections eighty-one and eighty-
two and where it is necessary that the use of water within a specific
geographic area be rationed or reviewed so as to—
(a) achieve a sustainable allocation of water from a water
resource or ground water which is under stress;
(b) achieve equity in allocations;
(c) promote beneficial use of water in the public interest;
(d) facilitate efficient use and management of water resources,
including the promotion of the conjunctive use of surface
and ground water; or
(e) protect the water resource quality and ecosystems;
the Authority may issue a notice, of not less than sixty days, in the
Gazette and a daily newspaper of general circulation in Zambia  or
a newsletter, requiring all users of water, including permit holders,
to apply or re-apply for permits for the use of water.
(2)
Following the receipt of applications or re-applications under
subsection (1), the Board shall, after undertaking public
consultations, grant permits for the use of water within that
geographic area, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
328
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Variation of
permit at
request of
permit
holder
Power to
require
permit
application
or re-
application


--- PAGE 65 ---

84.
(1) Subject to this Act, a permit may be cancelled by the
Board, on the recommendation of the Director-General—
(a) if the permit holder contravenes any condition of the permit;
(b) if the permit holder fails to make beneficial use of the
water or any part of the water within a period of one
year of the permit or such longer period as may be
determined by the Board taking into consideration the
nature of the investment;
(c) where it is necessary to enable a Government scheme or
community project to be undertaken in accordance with
this Act; or
(d) if the permit holder is convicted of an offence under this
Act and sentenced to a period of imprisonment
exceeding six months.
(2)
A permit shall not be cancelled under this section unless
notice of the proposed cancellation has been served on the permit
holder and the permit holder has been afforded a reasonable
opportunity to show cause to the Authority as to why the permit
should not be cancelled.
(3)
A permit holder whose permit is cancelled as a result of
paragraph (c) of subsection (1) shall be paid compensation in
accordance with the Lands Acquisition Act.
(4)
A person aggrieved with a decision of the Board, made
under subsection (1), may appeal to the Minister.
85.
(1) A permit holder who ceases to use water in accordance
with the terms and conditions of the permit may, by notice to the
Authority, abandon the whole of the permit or any part capable of
separation.
(2)
Where a permit holder abandons the whole or part of a
permit, under subsection (1), the Authority may direct the permit
holder to remove, within such time as it may specify, all or any
water works erected in connection with the permit.
(3)
A permit holder who neglects or fails to remove the water
works, specified under subsection (2), commits an offence and the
Authority may remove all or any portion of the works and may
recover the cost of their removal from the permit holder as a debt
owing to the Authority.
(4)
Notwithstanding subsection (3), the Authority may, if it
considers it to be necessary or prudent in the public interest, take
over the operations and management of abandoned water works.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
329
Cancellation
of permit
Abandonment
of activities
under permit
Cap. 189


--- PAGE 66 ---

(5)
Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring or
authorising a permit holder wholly or in part to abandon a permit
contrary to the conditions of any mortgage or charge upon the land
to which the permit is appurtenant.
86.
(1) Where a permit—
(a) is cancelled or varied by the Board;
(b) has been granted erroneously or irregularly; or
(c) has been granted in contravention of this Act;
the Board may, by notice served on the permit holder, require the
permit holder to surrender the permit to the Authority.
(2)
A permit holder who fails to comply with a notice under
subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to
the general penalty provided under section one hundred and
seventy-two.
87.
(1) The Authority shall establish and maintain a register
of permits that are in force and specify the details of the permits,
their terms and conditions and the results of monitoring and
enforcement action taken by the Authority regarding each permit.
(2)
Information contained in the register, established under
subsection (1), shall be accessible by the public on payment of a
prescribed fee.
(3)
An entitlement to use water granted under a permit shall
be registered , by the permit holder, in the Lands and Deeds Registry
in accordance with that Act, and the permit holder shall inform the
Authority of the date such registration was made.
PART X
LICENSING OF CONSTRUCTORS AND DRILLERS
88.
(1) A person shall not engage in the trade or business of
constructing any water works or drilling any boreholes without a
licence from the Authority.
(2)
The Board may licence a person as a constructor or a
driller and issue to that person a licence in such manner and under
such conditions as may be prescribed.
(3)
The Minister may prescribe—
(a) the criterion for the licensing of constructors or drillers;
and
(b) the qualifications for constructors and drillers who are
authorised to design, construct, install, operate or
maintain any water works or drill any borehole.
330
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Surrender of
permit
Register of
permits
Licensing of
constructors
and drillers
Cap. 185


--- PAGE 67 ---

89.
The Minister may prescribe—
(a) the procedure for applying for a licence and the grant,
modification, renewal, transfer and revocation of a
licence;
(b) the terms and conditions attaching to the application, grant,
modification, refusal, renewal, transfer or revocation of
a licence; and
(c) such other matters as are necessary or incidental to the
effective regulation of constructors and drillers licenced
under this Part.
90.
An engineer shall not carry out any functions relating to
the construction, design, installation, operation or maintenance of
any water works unless that engineer is approved by the Board, in
consultation with the Engineering Institution of Zambia.
91.
For the purposes of this Act, where any person is
contracted to construct water works or drill any borehole by an
occupier of land, the contractor shall be deemed to be the constructor
of the water works or driller of the borehole.
92.
The Authority shall establish and maintain a register, as
may be prescribed, of all constructors, drillers and engineers for
purposes of this Part.
PART XI
GROUND WATER AND BOREHOLES
93.
(1) The Authority shall protect ground water, in
collaboration with any appropriate or conservancy authority, by—
(a) encouraging the development of sustainable practices that
do not degrade ground water;
(b) specifying measures that are necessary to mitigate saline
intrusion into aquifers;
(c) preventing the pollution of aquifers through the regulation
of toxic substances that permeate the ground;
(d) recommending to the Minister the declaration of water
resource protection areas around groundwater, re-charge
areas and abstraction sources; and
(e) promoting measures to improve the safety and integrity
of boreholes.
(2)
The Authority may, for any borehole that is registered under
this Part, carry out periodic assessments of its characteristics.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
331
Procedure
for
application,
grant,
modification
etc. of
licence
Approved
engineers
Contractor
deemed to be
constructor
or driller
Register of
constructors,
drillers and
engineers
Protection of
ground water


--- PAGE 68 ---

94.
A person who intends to drill a borehole and the occupier
of the land shall, before any construction begins, notify the Authority,
a catchment council or a subcatchment council of the proposed
construction.
95.
(1)
The Director-General, a catchment council or a sub-
catchment council may, on such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed, within thirty days of the notification given under section
ninety-four, and after due investigations authorise in writing, the
drilling of a borehole.
(2)
Subject to section one hundred and sixty-two, an officer
of the Authority shall, where an authorisation is granted under
subsection (1)—
(a) have free access to the borehole;
(b) inspect the borehole and the material excavated from it;
(c) take specimens of the material and of the water abstracted
from the borehole; and
(d) inspect any record kept in respect of the borehole.
(3)
The Board shall specify the period of time for which the
records and specimen of the materials, kept or taken under
subsection (2), shall be kept by the person drilling the borehole or
the occupier.
(4)
The Authority shall ensure that all work necessary for the
development of a borehole or the location of boreholes are within
the distances prescribed.
(5)
Nothing in this section or in any authorisation given under
this section shall be construed so as to guarantee the quantity or
quality of the water obtainable from any borehole.
96.
(1) After the commencement of this Act, any borehole
which encounters brackish water or other substances, as prescribed,
shall be securely cased, plugged, or sealed off by the owner of the
borehole so that the brackish water or other substance shall be
confined to the strata in which it was found and the casing, plugging
or sealing of the borehole shall be done in a manner that is effective
to prevent the brackish water or other substance from escaping
from the strata in which it was found into any other waterbearing
strata or to the surface of the ground.
(2)
The owner of a defective borehole, referred to under
subsection (1), shall report the borehole to the Authority or a
catchment manager and provide the location and data on the
borehole.
332
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Notice to
drill borehole
Permission
to drill and
access for
inspection
Defective
borehole


--- PAGE 69 ---

97.
A person shall not recase or remove the plug or seals from
a defective borehole, as referred to under section ninety six, except
with the written authority of the Director-General or the catchment
manager.
98.
A person who contravenes section ninety four, ninety
five or ninety seven  commits an offence and is liable, upon
conviction, to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand penalty
units or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding twelve months,
or to both.
99.
(1) A person drilling a borehole shall—
(a) keep a journal of the progress of the work and, on
completion or abandonment of the work, send a
completion report, to the Authority and to the catchment
council or sub-catchment council concerned, which shall
specify the measurement of —
(i) the strata passed through; and
(ii) the levels at which water was struck and
subsequently rests; and
(b) send to the Authority and the catchment council or sub-
catchment council concerned particulars of any test
made, before completion or abandonment of the work,
of the flow of water, specifying—
(i) the rate of flow throughout the test;
(ii) the duration of the test;
(iii) where practicable, the water levels during the
test and afterwards until the water returns to
its natural  level; and
(iv) any other information as the Authority, the
catchment council or sub-catchment council
may request.
(2)
A driller or occupier of land, on which a borehole is being
drilled, may give notice to the Authority requiring—
(a) any information or any records connected with the borehole
kept or taken under this section; or
(b) any specimen or material connected with the borehole;
to be treated confidentially and the Authority, on receipt of the
notification, shall not allow any copy, extract, specimen or other
information to be made by, published or shown to, any person, not
being an employee of the Authority, unless the person giving the
notice consents.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
333
Interference
with
defective
borehole
Offences
Information
on ground
water and
confidentiality


--- PAGE 70 ---

(3)
Notwithstanding subsection (2), where the Authority gives
notice to any driller or occupier, who has given notice under
subsection (2), that the person’s consent is being unreasonably
withheld, that person may, within thirty days of the notice, appeal
to the Minister.
(4)
Where, at the expiration of the thirty day period referred
to in subsection (3), no appeal is made or if after hearing the appeal
the Minister does not make an order restraining the Authority from
disclosing the information, the Authority may proceed to disclose
the information.
(5)
A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand penalty units.
100.
(1) A person who drills a borehole shall, immediately
after the completion of the borehole, notify the Authority or
catchment manager, in writing, of the location and details of the
borehole.
(2)
The Authority shall keep a register of all boreholes in the
manner prescribed.
101.
(1) After the commencement of this Act, a catchment
council may require all occupiers to notify the catchment manager,
in writing, within the period specified, of the location and data relating
to any existing boreholes.
(2)
A person who, without good reason, fails or refuses to
comply with a requirement made under subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand penalty units.
PART XII
WATER WORKS
102.
(1) In this Part—
“ appurtenant works ” means water works which contribute,
directly or indirectly, to the functioning, operation or safety
of dams, and includes—
(a) outlet works, penstocks, pipelines, tunnels and other
water conduits;
(b) gated and ungated spillways and erosion control and
energy dissipating works, whether in the structure
of the dam or separate from the dam; and
334
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Register of
boreholes
Reporting of
existing
borehole
Definitions


--- PAGE 71 ---

(c) anchoring, buttressing, drainage and other stabilising
works in original earth or rock slopes, whether
downstream or upstream, of the dam;
“ community project ” means a project approved by the Board
and operating under a permit for one or more purposes
which are—
(a) connected with the use of water within a geographic
area; and
(b) classified and declared by the Board,  with the
approval of the Minister, as a community project;
 “dam” means a small dam or large dam and includes a weir,
barrage or other facility for the impoundment of water;
“dam with safety risk” means any dam—
(a) which can contain or store more than fifty thousand
cubic metres of water or as may be prescribed,
and which has a wall of a vertical height of more
than five metres measured as the vertical
difference between the lowest down stream ground
elevation on the outside of the dam wall and the
nonover spill crest level or the general top level of
the dam wall; or
(b) declared to be a dam with a safety risk under section
one hundred and twenty;
“ dam works ” means the alteration, construction, re-
construction or removal of a dam;
 “ de-commissioning ” in relation to a dam, means removing a
dam from service and, where appropriate, physically
dismantling it;
“full supply level” means the water level in a dam immediately
prior to the release of excess flood water through a
spillway;
“ Government scheme ” means—
(a) a scheme for any public purpose;
(b) a reservation by the Minister, after consultation with
the Authority, of the whole or part of a water
resource for any public purpose;
“large dam” means a structure, whether constructed or
proposed to be constructed, which, together with its
abutments, appurtenant works and foundation is capable
of diverting or storing water and which—
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
335


--- PAGE 72 ---

(a) has a vertical height of at least fifteen metres, or as
may be prescribed, measured from the
nonoverflow crest of the wall of the structure to
the lowest point on the downstream face of the
wall; or
(b) is capable of storing at least one million or more
cubic metres of water at full supply level;
“ owner ” in relation to a dam—
(a) means the permit holder; and
(b) includes the legal representative of a permit holder who
has died, become insolvent, is a minor or of unsound
mind or is otherwise under disability and, in the case of
a company, the liquidator of the company;
“ public purpose ” includes—
(a) the use of water, by the Government, for social or
economic development, in the public interest;
(b) the drainage or reclamation of land;‘
(c) the protection of any water resource, its source or
catchment;
(d) identification and development of a retarding basin
for the control and management  of flood water or
other measures for its control or disposal;
(e) the conservation or improvement of water quality;
or
(f) the storage or impoundment of water for purposes
of supply of water in bulk, including the
construction of reservoirs for impounding surface
runoff and for regulating stream flows to
synchronise them with water conservation
practices;
“ registration certificate ” means a registration certificate
issued under section one hundred and eleven; and
“ small dam ” means a structure, whether constructed or
proposed to be constructed, which, together with its
abutments, appurtenant works and foundation, is capable
of diverting or storing water and which—
(a) has a vertical height of more than eight metres, or
as may be prescribed, but less than fifteen metres
measured from the nonoverflow crest of the wall
of the structure to the lowest point on the
downstream face of the wall; or
336
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management


--- PAGE 73 ---

(b) is capable of storing more than five hundred thousand
but less than one million cubic metres of water at
full supply level.
103.
(1) Subject to this Act, a person shall apply to the
Authority for a permit, in accordance with Part IX, to construct
water works.
(2)
Part IX shall apply, with the necessary modifications, to a
permit for the construction of water works.
104.
After the commencement of this Act, a catchment council
may require all owners of water works to notify the catchment
manager, in writing, within the period specified, of the location and
data relating to any existing water works.
105.
The Authority shall keep a register of all water works in
the manner prescribed.
106.
(1) The Minister may, after reasonable notice to any
occupier, construct and maintain, upon any land, any Government
scheme.
(2)
The Government shall pay compensation, in accordance
with the Lands Acquisition Act, to the occupier of the land on which
any Government scheme shall be constructed but, in assessing the
amount of compensation payable, the President shall take into
consideration any benefit accruing as a result of the construction
of the scheme.
(3)
The cost of construction and maintenance of any water
works for a Government scheme shall be paid out of moneys
appropriated by Parliament or any other source for that purpose.
(4)
The development of water works and their management
for the purposes of a Government scheme for the supply of water
in bulk shall be undertaken in accordance with the relevant law.
107.
(1) The Board shall not approve any community project
unless—
(a) the proposed project is approved by the sub-catchment
council concerned; and
(b) provision is made, by the sponsors of the community
project, for an adequate alternative supply of water to
be used by any permit holder likely to be adversely
affected and unable to benefit from the project.
(2)
A permit for a community project shall not be cancelled or
varied except with the consent of the Minister.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
337
Permission
to construct
water works
Reporting of
existing
water works
Register of
water works
Government
schemes
Community
projects
Cap. 189


--- PAGE 74 ---

108.
(1) A Government scheme shall take precedence over
a community project and all other purposes for the use of water.
(2)
A community project shall take precedence over all other
purposes for the use of water, except a Government scheme.
(3)
The Minister may—
(a) direct that a Government scheme or community project
shall be executed together with, or in modification or
improvement of, any other water works; and
(b) order that any water works contemplated, under execution
or completed under a community project or Government
scheme, be paid for from public moneys to such extent
as may be appropriated by Parliament or from any other
source.
109.
Notwithstanding this Act, the Authority shall monitor the
construction of all dams and dam works.
110.
(1) A person shall not commence any dam works in
respect of a dam until—
(a) an engineer has—
(i) prepared a design, together with the plans and
specifications, of the proposed dam works; and
(ii) certified the adequacy and safety of the proposed
dam works and, in the case of modifications to
an existing dam, that the adequacy and safety
of the dam will not be prejudiced; and
(b) the owner of the dam has submitted to the Authority, in
the prescribed manner, together with the fee as
prescribed, such details of the design, plans,
specifications and certificate of adequacy and safety
specified under paragraph (a).
(2)
The Authority may, before approving the details submitted
under paragraph (b) of subsection (1), require any owner who
intends to commence dam works for a dam to—
(a) provide any additional information relating to the dam
works;
(b) modify the design, plans and specifications in any manner;
and
(c) provide any additional certificates of adequacy and safety;
as, and within the period, specified by the Authority.
(3)
Where, during the execution of any dam works, an owner
of a dam wishes to modify the details submitted under subsections
(1) and (2), the owner of the dam shall comply with this section in
respect of the modifications.
338
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Precedence
of
Government
schemes and
community
projects
Monitoring
of dams
works
Commence-
ment of dam
works for
dams


--- PAGE 75 ---

(4)
A person who—
(a) commences dam works in contravention of subsection
(1);
(b) fails, without reasonable excuse, to comply with a
requirement made under subsection (2); or
(c) being the owner of the dam, fails to ensure that the dam
works in respect of the dam are completed in accordance
with the details submitted under subsection (1) and to
the satisfaction of an engineer;
commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, in case of a—
(a) small dam, to a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand
penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years, or to both; and
(b) large dam, to a fine not exceeding three hundred thousand
penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding three years, or to both.
111.
(1) The owner of a dam shall, within a period of —
(a) thirty days from the completion of any dam works for the
dam, notify the Authority and a sub-catchment council
or catchment council, in writing, of the completion of
the dam works; and
(b) one hundred and twenty days from the completion of any
dam works or any longer period as the Authority may
allow, submit to the Authority and the sub-catchment
council or catchment council—
(i) a report in the prescribed form;
(ii) plans, in the prescribed form, certified as true and
correct by an engineer, of the completed dam
works;
(iii) a completion certificate, in the prescribed form,
of the adequacy, safety and completion of the
dam works, signed by the engineer;
(iv) in the case of dam works, other than the
construction of the dam, the registration
certificate, if any, issued in respect of the dam;
and
(v) when requested by the Authority to do so, such
further information as the Authority may
specify.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
339
Duty of
owner on
completion
of dams and
registration


--- PAGE 76 ---

(2)
On receipt of the report, plans, completion certificate, any
registration certificate and further information, if any, submitted
under subsection (1), the Director-General shall, within thirty days—
(a) in the case of the construction of a dam, register the dam
as a small or large dam and issue to the owner a
registration certificate in the prescribed form;
(b) in the case of dam works, other than the construction or
removal of a dam, amend the registration details and
certificate in respect of the dam; or
(c) in the case of the removal of a dam, cancel both the
registration of the dam and the registration certificate.
(3)
The owner of a dam who contravenes subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding twelve months, or to both.
112.
(1) The Authority may, in consultation with a catchment
council, by notice in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper of general
circulation in Zambia, require the owners of existing dams, within
that catchment, to notify the Authority, in writing and within such
period, of such particulars in respect of the dams, as may be specified
in the notice.
(2)
On receipt of the details submitted under subsection (1),
the Director-General or a catchment manager shall, in the case of
a dam which is not registered under this Act, register the dam and
issue to the owner a registration certificate, within three months of
the submission, in the prescribed form:
Provided that the Director-General may, in registering the
dam, require the owner to comply, within the period specified
by the Director-General, with conditions, stipulated by the
Board, that are necessary for the protection of persons and
property.
(3)
A person who fails to comply with a requirement made
under subsection (1), or any condition stipulated under subsection
(2), commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding twelve months, or to both.
113.
(1) An owner of a large dam shall ensure that an
engineer—
(a) supervises the progress of the dam works in order to secure
compliance with the design, plans and specifications
approved for  the dam works;
340
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Reporting of
dams in
certain areas
Supervision
of dam
works for
large dams


--- PAGE 77 ---

(b) maintains uptodate drawings of the dam works; and
(c) if so required by the Authority and a catchment council in
the area, submit, to the Authority and the sub-catchment
council or catchment council, any progress reports on
the dam works, within the periods specified by the
Authority, the sub-catchment council or catchment
council.
(2)
An owner of a large dam shall, if an engineer considers
that modifications to the details approved in respect of the dam
works are necessary—
(a) notify the Authority, in writing; and
(b) obtain the Authority’s approval, in writing of the
modifications before causing the modifications to be
made.
(3)
The Authority, a catchment council, sub-catchment council
or any person authorised, in writing, by either of them shall, during
the progress of any dam works for a large dam, have access to the
dam works for the purpose of inspection.
(4)
The Authority, a catchment council or a sub-catchment
council may, as a result of information received during the progress
of dam works for a large dam, require the owner of the dam to
cause an engineer to modify any design, plans or specifications
relating to the dam works.
(5)
An owner of a large dam who contravenes subsection (1)
or (2), or fails to comply with a requirement made under subsection
(4), commits an offence and shall be liable, on conviction, to a fine
not exceeding two hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two years, or to both.
114.
An owner of a large dam shall—
(a) cause an engineer to prepare instructions relating to the
maintenance and operation of the dam;
(b) cause the dam to be maintained and operated in
accordance with the instructions, prepared under
paragraph (a), and with any additional instructions as
the Authority or catchment council may give;
(c) cause detailed measurements and observations of the large
dam to be made by an engineer in such manner and at
such intervals as the Authority or the sub-catchment
council may require; and
(d) within thirty days from the date of completion of any
measurements and observations, made under paragraph
(c), submit to the Authority a report as the Authority
may specify.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
341
Maintenance
and
operation of
large dams


--- PAGE 78 ---

115.
(1) The Authority, a catchment council or sub-catchment
council,  may request the owner of a large dam to cause a detailed
engineering inspection of the large dam to be carried out by an
engineer before the end of the month of June or of such other
month as the catchment council or sub-catchment council may
specify immediately following—
(a) the first season during which water was diverted or stored
by the dam;
(b) the first season during which water spilled from the dam;
and
(c) the date of completion of construction of the dam.
(2)
The owner of a large dam shall, within thirty days of the
completion of the engineering inspection, carried out under
subsection (1), submit to the Authority a report of the inspection
and the maintenance measures carried out since the date of the
construction of the dam or last inspection of the dam.
(3)
Notwithstanding subsection (1), the Authority, a catchment
manager or any person authorised by either of them, may, at any
time, carry out a detailed engineering inspection of a large dam.
(4)
An owner of a large dam shall provide the Authority, a
catchment manager or any person authorised by either of them
with such assistance and facilities in the carrying out of an inspection
of the large dam as the Authority or catchment manager or such
other person may reasonably require.
(5)
If, as a result of any report relating to a large dam submitted
under subsection (2), the Authority considers that the large dam is
inadequate or unsafe, the owner of the large dam shall take such
remedial measures as the Authority shall direct within a period
specified by the Authority.
(6)
If the owner of a large dam fails to comply with a directive
given under subsection (5)—
(a) without reasonable excuse, the owner commits an offence
and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding
one hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding twelve months, or to both;
and
(b) the Authority shall carry out or cause to be carried out
such dam works as may be necessary to ensure the
adequacy and safety of the dam and recover the cost of
so doing, together with any interest as may be prescribed
on the costs incurred, from the owner.
342
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Periodic
inspections
of large dams


--- PAGE 79 ---

116.
(1) The Authority may require the owner of a dam to
carry out any dam works, as the Authority considers to be necessary,
within a period specified.
(2)
If the owner of a dam—
(a) carries out dam works, in accordance with a requirement
made under subsection (1), the DirectorGeneral shall
register or amend or cancel the registration of the dam
and issue a registration certificate or amend or cancel
the registration certificate accordingly;
(b) fails, without reasonable excuse, to carry out any dam
works, in accordance with a requirement made under
subsection (1), the owner commits an offence and is
liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding five
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding five years, or to both; or
(c) fails to carry out the dam works, in accordance with a
requirement made under subsection (1), the Authority
shall carry out or cause to be carried out the dam works
and recover the costs of so doing, together with interest
as may be prescribed on the costs incurred, from the
owner.
117.
The Authority, a catchment council, sub-catchment
council or any person authorised by either of them may—
(a) have access to the site of any dam works, whether
proposed or in progress, or to any existing dam for the
purpose of inspection; and
(b) if it is necessary to do so, in order to establish the adequacy
and safety or otherwise of any dam works, carry out
surveys and conduct investigations, whether by drilling,
excavating, mining or otherwise.
118.
(1) If, during the execution of any dam works, any sudden
danger is posed to the dam or structure connected with it and the
danger renders it necessary to carry out other dam works, the
owner shall—
(a) immediately commence the dam works; and
(b) within fortyeight hours of the commencement of the dam
works, notify the Authority, in writing, as fully as possible,
of the action, dam works undertaken and circumstances
necessitating the measures.
(2)
An owner of a dam who fails to comply with subsection
(1), commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not
exceeding five hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding five years, or to both.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
343
Right of
access,
inspection,
investigation
and survey
Owner to
carry out
dam works
Emergencies
arising during
execution of
dam works


--- PAGE 80 ---

119.
An owner of a dam shall give a catchment manager or
any person authorised by the Authority access to the dam to enable
the Authority to determine whether that dam—
(a) is a dam with a safety risk;
(b) should be declared to be a dam with a safety risk under
section one hundred and twenty;
(c) should be repaired or altered as specified by the Authority;
or
(d) complies with this Act.
120.
The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the
Authority, if the Minister is satisfied that any of the factors, specified
under section one hundred and twenty-one, applies to a dam, by
notice in the Gazette and in a daily newspaper of general circulation
in Zambia or a newsletter, declare the dam to be a dam with a
safety risk.
121.
A dam shall be declared a dam with a safety risk if—
(a) there is need to protect the public, property and the
resource quality against the potential hazards posed by
the dam;
(b) the extent of potential loss or harm is great;
(c) the cost of any prescribed measures will not be achievable;
(d) a negative socio-economic impact would result should
the dam fail;
(e) the dam is not properly designed, constructed, altered,
repaired, operated or maintained;
(f) the dam has been abandoned;
(g) the person who designed, constructed, altered, repaired,
operates, inspected or maintains the dam did not have
the qualifications or does not have the capacity, as the
case may be, to do so; and
(h) the manner in which the water is contained, stored,
impounded or released in the dam is dangerous,
inadequate or does not meet the specifications or
conditions specified by, or under, this Act.
122.
(1) The Authority may—
(a) notify, in writing, the owner of a dam, that the dam is a
dam with a safety risk;
(b) direct the owner of a dam with a safety risk to submit, at
the owner’s cost, and within a period specified by the
Authority, a report by a constructor or engineer regarding
the safety of the dam;
344
No. 
 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Declaration
of dam with
safety risk
Factors to
determine
whether dam
is dam with
safety risk
Control
measures for
dam with
safety risk
and de-
commissioning
of dams
Access to
dam for
certain
purposes


--- PAGE 81 ---

(c) direct the owner of a dam with a safety risk to undertake,
at the owner’s cost, and within a period specified by the
Authority, any specific repairs or other remedial
measures to the dam which are necessary to protect
the public, property or the resource quality from a risk
of failure of the dam; or
(d) on its own accord or on the recommendation of a
catchment council, sub-catchment council, any
appropriate authority or conservancy authority, de-
commission a dam with a safety risk under prescribed
conditions.
(2)
A person affected by a dam that the person reasonably
believes to be a dam with a safety risk may petition the Authority
for a review and evaluation of the dam and the owner of the dam
shall be given a right to respond to the petition within fourteen days
of receipt of a copy of the petition.
(3)
If the owner of a dam with a safety risk fails to undertake
any specific repairs or other remedial measures as directed by the
Authority, within the period specified, the Authority may undertake
or cause to be undertaken the repairs or other remedial measures
and recover the costs from the owner including interest as may be
prescribed on any costs incurred.
(4)
The Authority shall, before issuing a directive to repair or
undertake certain remedial measures, be satisfied that the repairs
or alterations required to be undertaken are necessary, adequate,
effective and appropriate to reduce the risk to an acceptable level.
123.
(1) An owner of a dam, that has any of the factors
specified under section one hundred and twenty-one, shall register
the dam, as a dam with a safety risk, with the Authority.
(2)
An application for registration of a dam with a safety risk
shall be made as soon as practicable and not later than thirty days—
(a) after the date on which the dam is able to impound water;
or
(b) after the date on which an already completed dam is
declared to be a dam with a safety risk.
(3)
A successor in title to an owner of a dam with a safety risk
shall promptly register the dam with the Authority.
124.
(1) A constructor or an engineer shall, where carrying
out any construction of any water works or dam works under this
Part, undertake all necessary activities within the constructor’s or
engineer’s power to ensure the safety of the works.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
345
Registration
of dam with
safety risk
Responsibilities
of
constructor
or engineer
over works


--- PAGE 82 ---

(2)
A constructor or engineer shall—
(a) ensure that the water works or dam works  are carried
out according to prescribed standards and specifications;
(b) keep any records that may be  prescribed by, or under,
this Act;
(c) compile any reports that may be prescribed by, or under,
this Act; and
(d) where the water works  or dam works include constructing,
altering or repairing a dam, issue a certificate of
completion of the works to the owner of the dam to the
effect that the task on that dam has been carried out
according to the design, drawings, standards and
specifications approved by the Authority.
PART XIII
EASEMENTS
125.
A right of easement granted under this Part shall not
give the person acquiring the easement any proprietary interest in
respect of the land on, over, under or through, which the easement
is exercised.
126.
The acquisition of an easement in accordance with this
Part shall not affect the burden or benefit of any encumbrance on
the land existing at the date of the acquisition or the liability or right
of any person in respect of the land.
127.
(1)
An easement shall include the right of access, along
a route to be approved by the Authority after consultation with the
occupier, to any piece of land contiguous to the water which is the
subject of a permit in so far as may be necessary for the purpose
of constructing, inspecting, maintaining, operating or repairing the
water works of the permit holder or for any purpose necessary for
the effective enjoyment of the easement.
(2)
A permit holder shall give reasonable notice to the occupier
over which the easement is held of an intention to enter the land
for any of the purposes mentioned in subsection (1).
128.
An easement granted under this Part shall be published
in the Gazette and a daily newspaper of general circulation in
Zambia.
129.
(1) Subject to this Part, an easement may be claimed
under this Part by any person who—
(a) holds a permit under this Act; or
(b) is entitled to control or supervise the use of any water.
346
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Easement
not
proprietary
interest in
land
Encumbrances
Easement
includes right
of access
Publication
of easement
Claim of
easement
and entry on
land


--- PAGE 83 ---

(2)
A person who is entitled to claim an easement under this
section may, after giving such notice as is reasonable in the
circumstances to the occupier, enter upon the premises, other than
a dwelling house, for the purpose of obtaining the information
required for compliance with section one hundred and thirty-seven.
130.
(1)
Subject to this Part, an easement shall be claimed
by serving on an occupier a notice, in writing, requesting the
easement, which request shall specify—
(a) the description of the proposed water works and a
statement of their use;
(b) the quantity or discharge of water, if any, to be diverted or
dealt with;
(c) in a map, the nature and locality of any water works or
area of swamp or land to be re-claimed if the easement
is for re-clamation of a swamp or land; and
(d) the area of the land, if any, which is, or will be—
(i) occupied by the water works;
(ii) flooded as a result of the water works;
(iii) required for the purposes of inspection and
maintenance of the works;
(iv) required for the control or prevention of pollution
of the water;
(v) the compensation which is offered; and
(vi) the period of time during which the permit holder
wishes to enjoy the easement.
(2)
A copy of the notice shall be sent by the permit holder to
the Authority
131.
Where the occupier agrees to a claim for an easement,
either as originally proposed or as modified by agreement, between
the parties concerned, the permit holder —
(a) shall embody the particulars and other matters pertaining
to the easement in a deed or other instrument suitable
for registration and register the deed or instrument in
accordance with the Lands and Deeds Registry Act;
and
(b) after its execution by the parties concerned, shall send
two copies of the deed or other instrument to the
Authority, certified by the Registrar in accordance with
the Lands and Deeds Registry Act.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
347
Method of
claiming
easement
Consent of
occupier to
easement
Cap. 185
Cap. 185


--- PAGE 84 ---

132.
Where the occupier does not, within sixty days after the
service of a notice under this Part, agree to the claim for an
easement, the permit holder may apply to the Board, in the
prescribed manner, for an easement and shall serve notice of the
application upon the occupier.
133. (1) The Board may dismiss the claim for an easement or
grant the claim, with or without modification and subject to such
conditions, including payment of  compensation, as the Board
considers just.
(2)
The Board shall notify the permit holder and the occupier
of its decision within sixty days of an application made under section
one hundred and thirty-two.
(3)
Where the claim for an easement is granted, the permit
holder shall embody the particulars and other matters pertaining to
an easement, granted under subsection (1), in a deed or other
instrument suitable for registration, and shall tender the deed or
instrument, together with the amount of any award of compensation
made, to the occupier for execution.
(4)
Where the occupier fails, within such time as may be
specified by the Board, to execute and deliver the deed or instrument
to the permit holder, the Board may do so on behalf of the occupier
and the deed or instrument shall have the same effect as if it had
been executed by the occupier.
(5)
The Registrar shall register the deed or instrument against
the title affected, in accordance with the Lands and Deeds Registry
Act, and two copies of the deed or instrument, certified by the
Registrar shall be sent by the permit holder to the Board.
(6)
Where an appeal has been lodged against a decision of
the Board, made under subsection (1), no action shall be taken
under subsection (3), (4) or (5) until the appeal has been decided.
134.
(1) An easement acquired under this Act shall lapse—
(a) if the water works authorised are not completed, and the
water is not used, within one year from the date of
acquiring the easement or within such further period as
the Board may determine, taking into account the nature
of the investment; or
(b) if, at any time, substantial use is not made of the permit,
in accordance with the terms of the permit, for a
continuous period of two years, or such longer period
as the Board may, in any particular case, determine.
348
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Application
when
occupier
does not
consent
Determination
of
application
for easement
Lapsing of
easement
Cap. 185


--- PAGE 85 ---

(2)
Upon the lapse of an easement, the Board shall notify the
Registrar, who shall cancel the registration of the easement against
the title affected, in accordance with the Lands and Deeds Registry
Act.
135.
(1) Where damage is caused, as a result of the  water
works of a permit holder, to the land over which the easement is
held, the occupier may require the permit holder to—
(a) construct such additional water works as are necessary,
in the opinion of the Board, to remedy  the damage or
prevent any recurrence of the damage; or
(b) pay compensation for the damage caused to the occupier
and, in such a case, the Board may, by order, require
the occupier to construct such water works at the
occupier’s sole expense to remedy the damage.
(2)
Where a permit holder fails to comply with subsection (1),
the Director-General may cancel the permit but without prejudice
to the payment of compensation to the occupier.
136.
(1) A permit holder who has acquired an easement for
the construction of water works on any occupier’s land which
prevents the occupier passing freely over or on the land or interferes
with any existing water works, structures or devices upon the land,
shall, at the expense of the permit holder, construct and maintain in
repair, to the satisfaction of the Board and under such conditions
as it may specify such—
(a) bridges and other structures and devices as will make
communication and passage safe and convenient; or
(b) water works, structures or devices as the Board considers
necessary to enable the occupier effectively to enjoy
the use of any water works, structures or devices that
have been interfered with.
(2)
A permit holder who fails to comply with subsection (1)
commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to the general
penalty provided under section one hundred and seventy-two.
137.
(1) Where  any water works  constructed on the land of
a person other than that of the permit holder is out of repair or
requires cleaning, the permit holder or the agent of the permit holder,
if notified, in writing, by the occupier to repair or clean the water
works, shall carry out such requirements within thirty days of the
notification.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 349
Damage
caused by
water works
of permit
holder
Construction
of water
works and
enjoyment of
existing
water works
Water works
to be in state
of repair
Cap. 185


--- PAGE 86 ---

(2)
Where the permit holder fails to carry out anything required,
under subsection (1), the occupier may cause to be done all the
things necessary for carrying out the repairs or cleaning of the
water works and may recover the cost of so doing from the permit
holder in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(3)
All the repairs or cleaning undertaken under subsection
(1) shall not be unreasonably demanded and, in the event of a
dispute between the parties, the Board shall decide what constitutes
reasonable repairs or cleaning.
(4)
A permit holder—
(a) who allows or suffers any water works to fall into disrepair;
or
(b) where the Authority determines that the water works are
in such a state as to require cleaning;
is liable for all the damages which may arise as a consequence of
the disrepair or lack of cleaning.
138.
(1) An occupier on, over or through whose land an
easement has been applied for or been granted, either before or
after the construction of any water works, may apply for a permit
to make use of the water works or the proposed water works of
the permit holder, as the case may be.
(2)
Before a permit is granted to an occupier under subsection
(1) —
(a) the occupier shall prove, to the satisfaction of the Authority,
that the water works of the permit holder can be
satisfactorily used for the purpose of the occupier and
without material detriment to the permit holder; and
(b) such proportionate costs of the water works shall be paid
by the occupier to the permit holder who intends to
construct, is constructing or has constructed the water
works, as may be agreed between the parties or, failing
agreement, as may be determined by arbitration.
(3)
A permit holder may require the occupier to enter into an
agreement to continue to pay the proportionate cost of maintaining
the portion of the water works made use of until either party has, in
writing, surrendered such entitlement and, in the event of
disagreement, the matter shall be settled by arbitration.
(4)
Where the water works, referred to in subsection (1),
require modification to enable the occupier to enjoy their use, the
occupier shall, unless the matter is otherwise agreed or settled, pay
to the permit holder—
350
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Use of water
works by
occupier


--- PAGE 87 ---

(a) the entire cost of modifying them in the manner approved
by the Board; and
(b) the cost of constructing and maintaining the devices for
apportioning the quantities of water, as the Board may
approve.
139.
Where water works have been excavated by a permit
holder on another person’s land—
(a) any land used solely for the deposit of the excavated
material from the water works executed shall,
notwithstanding the payment of compensation and
except in the case of an easement for drainage or
reclamation, remain available to the occupier for the
occupier’s own purposes; and
(b) the occupier may remove the excavated material, except
that no damage shall be done to the water works of the
permit holder nor shall the water works be obstructed
or interfered with by the removal.
140.
(1) A deed or other instrument creating an easement
acquired under this Part shall be registered against the title affected,
in accordance with the Lands and Deeds Registry Act, and a survey
diagram, which shall be approved in accordance with the Lands
Survey Act, shall be attached to each document granting the
easement.
(2)
Where an easement is to be effected on land in a
customary area, the instrument creating an easement under this
Part together with a plan, approved in accordance with the Lands
Survey Act, of that particular piece of land to which the easement
relates, and the written consent of the traditional authority under
whose jurisdiction that land falls, shall be registered in the
Miscellaneous Register in accordance with the Lands and Deeds
Registry Act.
141.
(1) An easement acquired under this Part shall terminate
where the permit for the exercise of the rights under which the
easement is acquired is cancelled or lapses, as provided for in this
Act.
(2)
On the cancellation or lapse of a permit, any water works
constructed by the permit holder on the land of an occupier shall
become the property of the occupier unless removed, subject to
subsection (3), by the permit holder —
(a) voluntarily, within two years from the date of the
cancellation or the lapse of the permit; or
(b) on the request of the occupier.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
351
Excavated
material
Easements to
be registered
Cap. 185
Cap. 188
Cap. 188
Termination
of easement
Cap. 185


--- PAGE 88 ---

(3)
Notwithstanding subsection (2), the removal of any fixed
assets to the land shall only be effected on the order of the Authority
or by the mutual agreement of the parties.
142.
The Authority shall,  on the termination, lapse or variation
of an easement, notify the occupier over whose land the easement
was granted, and the occupier may, at the expense of the person in
whose name the easement is registered, take such action as is
necessary to cause the occupier’s title to be freed from the
easement or to record the variation, as the case may require.
PART XIV
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS
143.
In this Part—
“ early warning system ” in relation to water, means any
system where information is obtained by, and transmitted
to, the Authority and made available to the public, in an
appropriate manner, in respect of an imminent emergency;
“ emergency ” means a disaster or incident connected with
water, resulting suddenly, either from natural causes or from
human conduct, and which causes or poses an imminent
threat or causes serious harm or damage to a water
resource, the people, property or to an area, and includes—
(a) a flood which is likely to occur or has occurred;
(b) a drought which is likely to occur or has occurred;
(c) any water works which might fail or have failed;
(d) any risk posed by any dam; or
(e) any hazardous matter or harmful or toxic substance
discharged into a water resource or ground water;
“national disaster” means an emergency which has been
declared by the President under section one hundred and
forty-five  as a national disaster; and
“ spillage ” means the discharge or seepage of any hazardous
matter or harmful or toxic substance into a water resource
or ground water,  as the case may be.
144.
The Authority shall, in collaboration with relevant
appropriate authorities—
(a) establish an early warning system;
(b) provide, install and maintain apparatus required for the
purposes of an early warning system; and
352
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Registration
of
termination,
lapse or
variation of
easement
Definitions
Early
warning
system


--- PAGE 89 ---

(c) carry out any other engineering or building operations
required for the efficient operation of an early warning
system;
either directly, or by requesting any other person or appropriate
authority to do so.
145.
(1) The President shall, on the recommendation of the
Authority, by statutory order, declare a national disaster due to any
emergency arising in the country.
(2)
The Minister shall, on the recommendation of the Authority,
by statutory order, declare an emergency relating to a specific area
of Zambia or the spillage of harmful or toxic substances.
146.
(1) Where the Minister declares an emergency relating
to a drought in a specific area or if the President declares a national
disaster due to a general drought in Zambia, the Authority may,
during the period of the declaration—
(a) suspend or amend any permit granted under this Act;
(b) determine the amount of water that may be used by any
person for any purpose;
(c) define places from which and times at which water may
be used; and
(d) give any necessary and practicable orders or take any
action suitable to ensure  equitable allocation and use of
water.
(2)
Where the President, on the advice of the Authority, is
satisfied that, by reason of an emergency, a serious deficiency of
water for essential domestic and noncommercial purposes exists
or is threatened in any area, the President may, by statutory order,
direct a person, who has a supply of water in excess of that person’s
needs for domestic and noncommercial purposes, to allow to be
supplied, the excess of water to the area or to a specified person in
the area, for such period, as the order may specify.
(3)
A person who directed by the President, under subsection
(2), fails to comply with the directive, commits an offence and is
liable, upon conviction, to the general penalty provided under section
one hundred and seventy-two.
(4)
A statutory order made under section one hundred and
forty-five or subsection (2) may require or authorise—
(a) the construction of water works on any land;
(b) the entry on to any land by any person authorised by the
Authority; and
(c) such other measures as the President may consider
necessary for the equitable use of water.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 353
Declarations
of
emergencies
Measures
during
droughts


--- PAGE 90 ---

(5)
Where a person fails to comply with this section, the
Authority or any person authorised by the Authority for the
purpose—
(a) may take possession of any water supply and operate any
water works of the person; and
(b) shall have and may exercise that person’s rights in
connection with the water works during the period of
the declaration, subject to any conditions imposed by
the statutory order.
(6)
A person exercising any powers under this section shall do
so with reasonable care and in such a manner as to cause as little
damage as possible in so doing.
(7)
A person who, without lawful authority, hinders or obstructs
any person acting in accordance with this section or interferes
with any water works constructed in accordance with this section,
commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to the general
penalty provided under section one hundred and seventy-two.
147.
Where the Minister declares an emergency relating to a
flood or impending flood in a specific area, or if the President
declares a national disaster due to widespread floods in Zambia,
the Authority may, during the period of the declaration—
(a) use any land as is required;
(b) compulsory purchase earth, stone or other materials;
(c) use rolling stock or other vehicles or tools;
(d) dispose of structures and other obstacles;
(e) give such orders or instructions as may be required to
reduce possible danger to life and property; and
(f) take any other measures as may be required.
148.
(1) The Authority shall take all practicable measures,
necessitated by the circumstances, to prevent, mitigate and eliminate
the harmful effects of any emergency.
(2)
Where an emergency has been declared by the Minister
or the President has declared a national disaster, and without
derogating from the generality of subsection (1), the Authority may—
(a) maintain existing water works by cleaning, repairing or
otherwise maintaining in a state of efficiency any existing
water resource or any water works;
(b) improve any existing water works by—
(i) deepening, widening, straightening or otherwise
improving any water resource;
354
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Measures
during floods
Emergency
water works


--- PAGE 91 ---

(ii) removing or altering any water works or any
obstruction to any water resource; or
(iii) raising, widening or otherwise improving any existing
water works; or
(c) construct new water works, erect any machinery or do
any other act required for the drainage of any land.
(3)
The Authority may enter into any agreement with any local
authority, appropriate authority or conservancy authority for the
carrying out, by that authority, of any water works authorised under
subsection (2).
(4)
The Authority, a local authority, appropriate authority or
conservancy authority may—
(a) without making any payment, appropriate and dispose of
any matter removed in the course of the carrying out of
any water works for widening, deepening or dredging
any water resource; and
(b) deposit any matter removed on the banks of the water
resource or on such width of land adjoining the water
resource as is required to carryout the water works.
149.
(1) Where the Minister declares an emergency relating
to  the spillage of any hazardous matter or harmful or toxic
substances or if the President declares a national disaster due to
the wide-spread impact of the spillage, the responsibility for
remedying the situation shall be with the person responsible for the
spillage who shall, after knowing about the spillage, immediately—
(a) report the spillage to the Authority, the police, an appropriate
authority, a conservancy authority, the catchment council
or sub-catchment council, local authority or any other
relevant institution in the area;
(b) take all reasonable measures to contain and minimize the
effect of the spillage;
(c) undertake clean-up procedures as the Authority may direct;
(d) remedy the effects of the spillage; or
(e) take such measures as the Authority, appropriate authority
or conservancy authority may either, orally or in writing,
direct.
(2)
An oral directive of the Authority, appropriate authority or
conservancy authority, given under subsection (1), shall be confirmed
in writing within twenty-four hours.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
355
Spillage of
harmful or
toxic
substances


--- PAGE 92 ---

(3)
Where a person who is responsible for a spillage fails to
comply, or inadequately complies, or it is not possible for the
Authority, appropriate authority or conservancy authority to give
the directive to that person in time, the Authority may—
(a) take all reasonable measures to contain and minimise the
effect of the spillage;
(b) inform the public by the most efficient means of
communication of the spillage;
(c) undertake any cleanup procedures that may be necessary;
(d) remedy the effects of the spillage; and
(e) recover all the reasonable costs incurred by the Authority
as a result of any activity under this subsection from the
person who caused the spillage.
(4)
Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with any
directive given under this section commits an offence and is liable,
upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand
penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five
years, or to both.
PART XV
WATER USE CHARGES, FEES AND WATER
DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND
150.
Any charge or fee prescribed, charged or fixed under
this Act shall be in accordance with a pricing strategy issued by the
Minister, in consultation with the Authority, and shall be fixed so as
to—
(a) recover reasonable costs related to the management of
the water resource;
(b) recover the costs of administration of the licence and
permit systems;
(c) recover the costs of administration relating to the processing
of data and information;
(d) provide a reasonable rate of return upon any investment
relating to water;
(e) reflect the source from which the water has been used;
(f) reflect the purpose for which the water will be used;
(g) take into account—
(i) the costs involved in the construction of any water
works or dam works;
356
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Pricing
strategy


--- PAGE 93 ---

(ii) any investments made for the conservation of water
resources;
(iii) the strategic importance of the use of the water
applied for in the national interest;
(iv) any investment made that benefits a local community;
and
(v) any de-watering activities that need to be done, under
any other law, for mining and industrial purposes.
151.
(1) The Minister may prescribe charges for the use of
water, other than for the purposes  specified under section seventy.
(2)
Subject to subsection (1), the Minister may prescribe
different charges for different purposes and categories of uses of
water.
152.
The Minister shall prescribe a fee for—
(a) any application for, or grant of, a permit, licence or
certificate under this Act; or
(b) the processing or provision of any data or information
under this Act.
153.
(1) The Authority shall recover any fee or charge due
and payable to the Authority as provided under section one hundred
and seventy-six or as may be prescribed.
(2)
Where any charge or fee prescribed is not paid—
(a) interest shall be payable at a rate to be prescribed by the
Minister, during the period of the default, not exceeding
the Bank of Zambia base rate; and
(b) the permit, licence or certificate to which the charge or
fee relates may be suspended or restricted until the
charges or fees and the interest have been paid.
(3)
A person whose permit is suspended or restricted under
this section shall not  claim the water or easement to which that
person would otherwise have been entitled during the period of
restriction or suspension.
154.
(1) The Authority shall retain in a fund managed by it all
of the revenue from water use charges and fees paid to the
Authority, to be applied by the Authority in meeting costs incurred
in the performance of its functions and that of a sub-catchment
council and catchment council.
(2)
Without limiting subsection (1), funds retained by the
Authority under that subsection, may be applied for the payment of
compensation payable by the Authority under this Act.
Water Resources Management   
    [No. 21 of 2011
357
Water use
charges
Fees
Recovery of
water use
charges and
fees
Retention of
charges and
fees and
application
of Funds


--- PAGE 94 ---

155.
(1) There is hereby established the Water Development
Trust Fund which shall be managed by trustees.
(2)
The Minister shall draw up and register under the relevant
law a trust deed to provide for the regulation and management of
the Fund.
(3)
A trust deed drawn up under subsection (2) shall provide
for the tenure of office of the trustees, staff, finances, financial
management and procedures of the trusteeship.
(4)
There shall be ten trustees of the Fund appointed by the
Minister who shall be representatives of the following:
(a) the Zambia Institute of Chartered Accountants;
(b) the Zambia Development Agency;
(c) the Bankers Association of Zambia;
(d) the Zambia Chambers of Commerce and Industry;
(e) the Attorney-General; and
(f) the Permanent Secretaries in the ministries responsible
for agriculture, local government, finance, water and
environment.
(5)
The moneys in the Fund shall be used for the development,
conservation and management of water resources.
(6)
There shall be paid into the Fund—
(a) such moneys as may be appropriated by Parliament for
the purposes of the Fund;
(b) such moneys as may be received by the Fund from
donations, grants and bequests from whatever source;
and
(c) such other moneys as may, by or under any law, be payable
to the Fund.
(7)
The Minister, on the recommendation of the trustees, shall
develop principles and guidelines governing the grant of moneys
from the Fund and for achieving the objectives of the Fund.
(8)
There may be paid from the Fund such grants as the trustees
may authorise in furtherance of the objectives of the Fund.
156.
(1) The financial year of the Fund shall be the period of
twelve months ending on 31st December of each year.
(2)
The trustees shall cause to be kept proper books of account
and other records relating to the Fund accounts.
358
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Water
Development
Trust Fund
Financial
matters of
Fund


--- PAGE 95 ---

(3)
The accounts of the Fund shall be audited annually by the
Auditor-General or by independent auditors appointed by the
Auditor-General.
(4)
The auditor’s fees shall be paid by the Fund.
(5)
As soon as practicable, but not later than ninety days after
the end of the financial year of the Government, the trustees of the
Fund shall submit to the Minister a report concerning the activities
of the Fund during the financial year.
(6)
The report referred to in subsection (5), shall include
information on the financial affairs of the Fund and there shall be
appended to the report—
(a) an audited balance sheet;
(b) an audited statement of income and expenditure; and
(c) such other information as the Minister may require.
(7)
The Minister shall, not later than seven days after the first
sitting of the National Assembly next after the receipt of the report
referred to in subsection (5), lay the report before the National
Assembly.
PART XVI
ENFORCEMENT AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
157.
(1) Where no specific provision is specified under this
Act providing for an appeal or the process for appeal by any person
aggrieved by a decision of—
(a) a catchment council, sub-catchment council or a water
users association, that person may appeal to the  Director-
General;
(b) the Director-General, that person may appeal to the Board;
(c) the Board, that person may appeal to the Minister; or
(d) the Minister, that person may appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2)
The Board shall encourage and facilitate the resolution of
disputes over water between users, users and the Board or users
and a water users association by using alternative dispute resolution
methods such as—
(a) arbitration
(b) mediation; or
(c) conciliation;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
359
Appeals and
disputes
Act No. 19
of 2000


--- PAGE 96 ---

(3)
Dispute resolution over water in any area under the
jurisdiction of a catchment council, sub-catchment council or water
users association shall be undertaken by the community or a dispute
resolution committee  as  may be prescribed.
(4)
The Arbitration Act, 2000, shall, unless the context otherwise
requires, apply to dispute resolution where a neutral person is
appointed by the parties, to resolve any dispute or reconcile the
parties, but shall not apply to dispute resolution as prescribed under
subsection (3).
(5)
The parties to a dispute that has been referred to an
arbitrator shall bear the costs of the arbitral proceedings.
(6)
The costs of arbitral proceedings for dispute resolution under
subsection (3) shall be borne by the Board.
(7)
For the purposes of this Act, “arbitral proceedings” means
proceedings conducted for purposes of this Act, and as may be
prescribed, for the settlement of disputes relating to the use of
water.
(8)
The Authority shall have the jurisdiction to hear and
determine disputes relating to the use of water, and shall exercise
such powers and functions, in relation to the determination of
disputes, as may be conferred or imposed on it by, or under, this or
any other law.
(9)
An appeal made under this Act or any dispute to be
determined by the Authority by, or under, this Act shall be heard
and finalised within sixty days of its lodgement.
158.
An appeal shall not be entertained by the sub-catchment
council, catchment council, Director-General, the Board or the
Minister unless it is lodged—
(a) within the period provided under this Act for the lodgement
of an appeal against the decision or order concerned; or
(b) where no period is so provided, within thirty days after
the date on which written notice was served on the
person, notifying that person of the decision or order
against which the person wishes to appeal;
except that the sub-catchment council, catchment council, Director-
General, the Board or the Minister may, in any case, for good cause
shown, admit an appeal after the time specified for lodgement of
the appeal has expired.
360
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Time for
lodging
appeal
Act No. 19
of 2000


--- PAGE 97 ---

159.
(1) In determining an appeal, the Minister, Board,
Director-General, a catchment council or sub-catchment council
may affirm, quash or vary the decision or order concerned, as
justice requires.
(2)
In determining a dispute or in exercising any other quasi
judicial function, an authority referred to under subsection (1),  shall
decide the matter on the merits of the case and make  an order
which shall do justice between the parties.
160.
(1) Subject to this Act, a permit holder or any person,
proposing to apply for a permit, who wishes to enter on to the land
of another person, shall, if that permit holder or other person’s
proposal is opposed by the occupier—
(a) upon submitting in the manner prescribed—
(i) a general description of the proposal;
(ii) a schedule of land which may be affected by the
construction and operation of any water works  to
be undertaken under the permit; and
(iii) the names and addresses of  the affected occupier;
and
(b) upon payment of the prescribed fee;
obtain from the Authority permission to enter on to the land
concerned and to carry out any necessary survey or other
preliminary investigations in connection with the location of any
proposed water works.
(2)
The Authority may stipulate a time limit within which the
investigation, carried out under subsection (1), shall be completed.
(3)
The Authority shall not give permission to any person to
enter on any land until the Authority has notified each occupier
concerned that an application to enter the land has been made
under this section.
161.
An inspector, agent of the Authority or any person
authorised by the Authority for the purpose, may at all reasonable
times, without warrant, enter on to any land and inspect any water
resource located within, or accessible from, the land for the purpose
of—
(a) conserving or regulating the water resource or protecting
the bed  over which it lies or flows;
(b) preventing the excessive or illegal diversion or waste of
the water resource or interference with any bed;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 361
Determination
of appeals
and disputes
Entry by
permit holder
or person
applying for
permit
Entry by
inspectors or
other
authorised
persons


--- PAGE 98 ---

(c) ascertaining whether there is or has been any contravention
of this Act;
(d) preventing or detecting a contravention of this Act;
(e) preventing water degradation by—
(i) ascertaining whether or not circumstances exist which
would justify the Authority imposing a requirement
to execute water works or take other action to
prevent degradation; or
(ii) exercising any power conferred on the Authority
under this Act to execute and maintain water works
or take other action; or
(f) protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons in
respect of the use of water.
162.
(1) In this section, “authorised person” means a person
entering on to any land or premises under an authorisation or
permission granted under this Act.
(2)
Subject to subsection (3), an authorised person shall not
enter on to the land or premises of any other person—
(a) without first giving reasonable notice, whether written,
verbal or otherwise, to the occupier or other person in
charge of the land or premises; and
(b) during unreasonable hours.
(3)
Notwithstanding subsection (2), an inspector may enter,
without giving notice, if the inspector—
(a) has reason to believe that a provision of this Act or order
made under this Act has been or is about to be
contravened;
(b) is unable to give notice within a reasonable time having
regard to all the circumstances; or
(c) has given reasonable grounds for not giving notice.
(4)
Where so requested by the occupier of the land or premises,
the authorised person shall produce evidence of the authorisation
or permission, as the case may be, to enter on to the land.
(5)
A person exercising any power under this section shall do
so with reasonable care and in such a manner as to cause as little
damage as possible in so doing.
163.
(1) A person shall not, without a permit, use water from
any water resource or negligently allow or cause any other person
to use water from any water resource in contravention of this Act.
362
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Manner of
entry
Use water
without
permit
prohibited


--- PAGE 99 ---

(2)
A person who contravenes subsection (1), commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to the general penalty
provided under section one hundred and seventy-two.
164.
(1) A person shall not —
(a) wilfully obstruct, molest or hinder an inspector or other
employee of the Authority or any person authorised or
permitted by the Minister or the Authority, from
exercising or performing their powers and functions
under this Act;
(b) without the written permission of the Authority, knowingly
or wilfully—
(i) deface, alter or remove; or
(ii) cause to be defaced, altered or removed;
any survey mark, water gauge, weir or measuring device or other
water works, structure or appliance installed, by or with the approval
of the Authority, for the purposes of control of water or
investigations;
(c) wilfully hinder or interrupt, or cause to be hindered or
interrupted, any permit holder or that permit holder’s
employee, contractor or agent, in the lawful  exercise
or performance of any power and function under this
Act;
(d) without lawful authority, wilfully let off or discharge water
from the water works of any permit holder so that the
permit holder loses the use of that water;
(e) without lawful authority, lay, erect or construct, or cause
to be laid, erected or constructed, any water works to
connect with the water works of any permit holder
which is capable of drawing water from the water works;
(f) unlawfully interfere with the water works or water supply
of any permit holder; or
(g) neglect or fail to comply with any lawful order or directive
given under this Act.
(2)
A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to the general penalty
specified under section one hundred and seventy-two.
165.
(1) Where by a person’s act or omission that person
contravenes any requirement or prohibition made or imposed by, or
under, this Act and where no provision is made for the remedying
of the default or contravention, without affecting any other liability
of the person under this Act or otherwise in respect of the
contravention or default, the Authority may, by order served on the
person concerned, require that person, within a reasonable time
specified in the order to—
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
363
Miscellaneous
offences
Remedy of
defaults
where not
provided


--- PAGE 100 ---

(a) remedy the contravention or default;
(b) make good any detriment identified in the order which
was caused to any water resource by reason of the
contravention or default; and
(c) remove or destroy any water works, plant or machinery
employed for the purposes of the contravention or
default.
(2)
The Authority, any appropriate authority, conservancy
authority, catchment council, sub-catchment council or water users
association may, if any person does not comply with an order issued
under subsection (1),  take such steps as are necessary to execute
the order and the expenses incurred in doing so shall be recoverable
as a debt owing to the Authority.
166.
(1) A permit holder and any employee or agent of a permit
holder shall, on demand by an inspector appointed under this Act—
(a) avail to the inspector such information as is within their
knowledge in all matters relating to any investigation
conducted under this Act; and
(b) produce for inspection, any permit, licence, certificate,
map, plan, specification, drawing or other document or
record as the case may be, relating to—
(i) the permit, licence or certificate;
(ii) any water works constructed under the permit,
licence or certificate; or
(iii) the flow of water in any water works or in any
water resource affected by the water works.
(2)
A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to the general penalty
provided under section one hundred and seventy-two.
167.
(1) A person who has committed or has been alleged to
have committed an offence under this Act and who—
(a) refuses, on demand of an inspector or an authorised person,
to give that person’s name and place of abode and other
particulars which the inspector or person may reasonably
require; or
(b) in purported compliance with any demand made by an
inspector or authorised person, gives a name, place of
abode or other particulars which the inspector or person
has reason to believe to be false;
may be arrested by the inspector or authorised person, without
warrant, and handed over to the nearest police officer.
364
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Duty to
provide
information
to inspector
Requirement
to state name
and address


--- PAGE 101 ---

(2)
Where the true name and place of abode or other particulars
of any person, specified in subsection (1), have been ascertained,
that person shall be released on executing a bond, if so required,
with or without sureties, to appear before a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(3)
Where a person’s true name, place of abode or other
particulars are not ascertained within twentyfour hours from the
time of that person’s arrest or should that person fail to execute a
bond or, if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, that person
shall forthwith be brought before a court of competent jurisdiction.
168.
(1)
Any notice required to be served under this Act
shall be served—
(a) by delivering it personally to the person required to be
served or, if the person is absent or cannot be found—
(i) by leaving it at the person’s usual or last known place
of abode in Zambia; or
(ii) by registered post, addressed to the person’s usual
or last known address in Zambia; or
(b) in the case of a notice required to be served on a local
authority, company or other corporate body, by delivering
it to its principal officer, leaving it at the office with the
employee or sending it through registered post.
(2)
Where an occupier is not known and, after diligent inquiry,
cannot be found, a notice may be served on the occupier by causing
it to be put in a conspicuous position on a property in Zambia last
known to have been occupied by that person.
(3)
A notice required to be served on an occupier may be
addressed to “the occupier” of the land or premises described in
the address in respect of which the notice is given, without further
name or description.
169.
An order, notice, consent, approval, permission, demand,
objection, application or other thing authorised or required by this
Act to be given, made or issued by, or to, the Minister, the Authority,
the Board, the Director-General, catchment council, subcatchment,
water users association or any other person, shall be in writing.
170.
(1) An order, notice, consent, approval, demand or other
document which the Authority is authorised or required by, or under,
this Act to give, make or issue may be signed on behalf of the
Authority by—
(a) the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Director-General or
Secretary; or
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 365
Service of
notices
Order, etc. to
be in writing
Authentication
of documents


--- PAGE 102 ---

(b) any officer of the Authority authorised by the Director-
General, in writing, to sign documents of the particular
kind or to sign the particular document.
171.
In the exercise of any power or duty under this Act,
anything done or omitted to be done by—
(a) the Minister, Authority, Board, the Director-General, a
catchment council, sub-catchment council or a water
users association;
(b) any person acting on the direction of the Minister; or
(c) any member or employee of, or person acting on, the
direction of the Authority, the Board or any catchment
council, sub-catchment council or water users
association;
shall not subject the Minister or any other person referred to in this
section, in that person’s personal capacity, to any action, suit, claim
or demand whatsoever, if it was done or omitted to be done in good
faith for purposes of executing this Act.
172.
(1) A person who commits an offence under this Act is,
if no other penalty is specified or prescribed in respect of the
offence, is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding five
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding five years, or to both.
(2)
In addition to the penalties specified under subsection (2),
any contravention of this Act shall be a ground for refusing the
grant of any permit or licence or the cancelling of any permit or
licence.
173.
Where an offence under this Act is committed by a body
corporate or an unincorporate body, every director or manager of
the body corporate or an unincorporate body shall be liable, upon
conviction, as if the director or manager had personally committed
the offence, unless the director or manager proves to the satisfaction
of the court that the act constituting the offence was done without
the knowledge, consent or connivance of the director or manager
or that the director or manager took reasonable steps to prevent
the commission of the offence.
174.
(1) The Director of Public Prosecutions may, at the
request of the Authority, appoint by name or rank an employee of
the Authority as a prosecutor to prosecute any person for an offence
committed by that person in contravention of this Act.
(2)
A person appointed as a prosecutor, under subsection (1),
shall—
366
No. 21 of 2011]
Water Resources Management
Protection of
Minister and
others from
liability
General
penalties for
offences
Offences by
corporation
Prosecutions


--- PAGE 103 ---

(a) have the powers of a prosecutor under the law; and
(b) act in accordance with the general or special instructions
of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
175.
(1) Subject to subsection (2), if a person  alleged to be
an offender under this Act hereinafter called the alleged offender
agrees to pay a specified fine proposed by the Authority, which
does not exceed the maximum fine provided by this Act for the
offence in question, the Director-General may impose that fine on
the alleged offender.
(2)
Where criminal proceedings have been instituted against
an alleged offender for an offence under this Act, the power
conferred by this section shall not be exercised without the written
consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
(3)
The Director-General shall furnish an alleged offender with
a certificate setting out the nature of the offence, the date of its
occurrence and the fine imposed under subsection (1) and that
certificate may be used by the alleged offender as prima facie
proof of the facts stated in the certificate.
(4)
Where any fine, imposed in terms of subsection (1), is not
paid on demand, the DirectorGeneral may take steps for, or towards,
its recovery in a manner permitted by this Act with respect to the
recovery of unpaid charges, fees or debts due and owing to the
Authority.
(5)
The imposition of a fine, under subsection (1), shall not be
treated as a conviction of the alleged offender of a criminal offence
and prosecution for the offence in question shall not thereafter be
instituted or maintained.
(6)
Nothing in this section shall, in any way, affect a liability
for the payment of any charge, fee, debt or interest due under this
Act.
176.
(1) An officer appointed for the purposes of this Act
may, under warrant by the Director-General, levy distress upon
the water works, goods and chattels of the person from whom any
charge, fee or debt is recoverable.
(2)
A distress levied under this section shall be kept for ten
days either at the premises at which such distress is levied for, or
at such other place as the person authorised under warrant may
consider appropriate at the cost of the person from whom any
charge, fee or debt is recoverable.
   Water Resources Management   
   [No. 
 of 2011
 367
Fine in lieu
of
prosecution
Recovery by
distress


--- PAGE 104 ---

(3)
If the person from whom any charge, fee or debt is
recoverable does not pay the charge, fee or debt due together with
the costs incurred in levying the distress and all other costs incidental
thereto within the period of ten days mentioned in subsection (2),
the water works, goods and chattels upon which distress has been
levied shall be sold by public auction and the proceeds realised
from such sale shall be applied towards the payment of the costs
and all further costs incurred in completing the sale and, the surplus,
if any, shall be applied to the payment of any charge, fee or debt
and, the balance, if any, shall be paid to the person.
(4)
Civil or criminal proceedings shall not be instituted against
an officer for any act or omission arising out of the levying of
distress.
(5)
Where the person upon whose water works goods or
chattels distress is to be levied or has been levied, fraudulently
removes and conveys away the water works, which are capable
of being moved, goods or chattels to prevent the Director-General
from distraining them or completing the distress so levied, or if any
person wilfully and knowingly aids or assists the person in the
fraudulent conveying away or carrying off of any or part of such
waterworks, goods or chattels or in concealing them, every person
so offending—
(a) shall forfeit to the Director-General a sum equal to double
the value of the waterworks, goods or chattels carried
off or concealed; and
(b) commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a
fine not exceeding three hundred thousand penalty units
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years,
or to both.
177.
Where this Act requires that there be public consultation
on any matter, the consultation shall be undertaken in a manner
and under a procedure prescribed by the Minister.
178.
An inspection, under this Act, of any water works or
boreholes, shall not constitute or imply any guarantee to support or
justify any claim against the Authority or the Government.
179.
(1)
The Minister may make regulations for, or with
respect to, any matter which by this Act is required or permitted to
be prescribed or which is necessary or expedient to be prescribed
for carrying out or giving effect to this Act.
(2)
Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1),
regulations made under this Act may make provision for, or with
respect to—
368
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Public
consultation
No warranty
implied by
inspection
Regulations


--- PAGE 105 ---

(a) abstraction of ground water and the water works so
required;
(b) safety of dams;
(c) inspection of water works and dam works;
(d) abandoned water works;
(e) plans and specifications to be submitted under this Act;
(f) forms to be used or the type of certificates, permits or
licences to be issued under this Act;
(g) dewatering of mines and quarries, drainage and reclamation
of swamps;
(h) protection of aquatic life, flora and fauna; and
(i) Government schemes and community projects.
(3)
Regulations made under this section may create offences
in respect of any contravention of the regulations and may for any
such offence impose penalties not exceeding one hundred thousand
penalty units or imprisonment for a period not exceeding twelve
months, or to both.
180.
(1)
The Water Act, 1949, is hereby repealed.
(2)
Notwithstanding the repeal of the Water Act, the provisions
of the Second Schedule relating to savings and transitional provisions
shall apply.
FIRST SCHEDULE
(Section 7(2))
PART 1
ADMINISTRATION OF AUTHORITY
1.
(1)
The seal of the Authority shall be such device as may
be determined by the Authority and shall be kept by the Secretary.
(2)
The Chairperson or the ViceChairperson and the Secretary
or any other person authorised by a resolution of the Board to so
act, shall authenticate the affixing of the seal.
(3)
Any contract or instrument which, if entered into or
executed by a person not being a body corporate, would not be
required to be under seal, may be entered into or executed without
seal on behalf of the Authority by the Secretary or any other person
generally or specifically authorised by the Board in that behalf.
(4)
Any document purporting to be a document under the seal
of the Authority or issued on behalf of the Authority shall be received
in evidence and shall be deemed to be so executed or issued, as the
case may be, without further proof, unless the contrary is proved.
   Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 369
Repeal of
Cap. 198
Seal of
Authority
Savings and
transitional
provisions


--- PAGE 106 ---

2.
(1) Subject to this Act, a member of the Board shall hold
office for a period of three years from the date of appointment and
may be re-appointed for a further like period.
(2)
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a member shall,
on the expiration of the period for which the member is appointed,
continue to hold office until another member is appointed to succeed
that member but in no case shall the further period exceed four
months.
(3)
The office of a member becomes vacant—
(a) upon the member’s death;
(b) if the member is adjudged bankrupt;
(c) if the member is absent from three consecutive meetings
of the Board of which the member has had notice,
without the prior approval of the Board;
(d) upon the expiry of one month’s notice of the member’s
notice to resign from office, given by the member in
writing to the Board;
(e) if the member becomes mentally or physically incapable
of performing the duties of a member of the Board;
(f) if the member ceases to be a member of the organisation
which nominated the member; or
(g) if the member is convicted of an offence under this Act
or any other law.
(4)
The Minister shall, where the office of a member becomes
vacant, appoint another member in place of the member who
vacates office, and such member shall hold office for the remainder
of the term.
(5)
A member may resign upon giving one month’s notice, in
writing, to the organisation which nominated the member and to
the Minister.
3.
Whenever the office of a member becomes vacant before
the expiry of the term of office the Minister may appoint in
accordance with section eleven, another member in place of the
member who vacates office but such member shall hold office
only for the unexpired part of the term.
4.
(1) Subject to this Act, the Board may regulate its own
procedure.
(2)
The Board shall meet for the transaction of business at
least once in every three months at such places and times as the
Chairperson may determine.
370
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Tenure of
office and
vacancy
Filling of
casual
vacancy
Proceedings
of the Board


--- PAGE 107 ---

(3)
Upon giving notice of not less than fourteen days, a meeting
of the Board may be called by the Chairperson and shall be called
if not less than one third of the members so request in writing:
Provided that if the urgency of any  particular matter does
not permit the giving of such notice, a special meeting may be
called upon a shorter notice being given by three members of
the Board.
(4)
Seven members of the Board shall form a quorum.
(5)
There shall preside at any meeting of the Board—
(a) the Chairperson; and
(b) in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson,
and in the absence of the Chairperson and the Vice-
Chairperson, such member as the members present may
elect for the purpose of that meeting.
(6)
A decision of the Board on any question shall be by a majority
of the members present and voting at the meeting and in the event
of an equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting shall
have a casting vote in addition to the deliberative vote.
(7)
Where a member is for any reason unable to attend any
meeting of the Board, the member may, in  writing, nominate another
person from the same organisation to attend such meeting in that
member’s stead and such person shall be deemed to be a member
for the purpose of that meeting.
(8)
The Board may invite any person, including any
representative of a catchment council or sub-catchment council,
whose presence is in its opinion desirable, to attend and to participate
in the deliberations of the meeting of the Board but such person
and representative shall have no vote.
(9)
The validity of any proceedings, act or decision of the Board
shall not be affected by any vacancy in the membership of the
Board or by any defect in the appointment of any member or by
reason that any person not entitled to do so took part in the
proceedings.
(10)
The Board shall cause minutes to be kept of the
proceedings of every meeting of the Board and every meeting of
any committee established by the Board.
5.
There shall be paid to members of the Board or any
committee of the Board such allowances as the Board may, with
the approval of the Minister, determine.
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
 371
Allowances
for members


--- PAGE 108 ---

6.
(1) If a member or  person is present at a meeting of the
Board or a committee of the Board at which any matter, in which
that person or any member of the person’s immediate family, is
directly or indirectly interested in a private capacity, is the subject
of consideration, that person or member shall, as soon as is
practicable after the commencement of the meeting, disclose that
interest and shall not, take part in any consideration or discussion
of, or vote on any question relating to, that matter.
(2)
A disclosure of interest made under this section shall be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which it is made.
7.
(1) A person shall not, without the consent in writing given
by, or on behalf of, the Authority, publish or disclose to any
unauthorised person, otherwise than in the course of duties of that
person, the contents of any document, communication or information
whatsoever, which relates to or which has come to the knowledge
of that person in the course of that person’s duties under this Act.
(2)
A person who contravenes subparagraph (1) commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding two
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years, or to both.
(3)
A person who, having any information which to the
knowledge of that person has been published or disclosed in
contravention of sub-paragraph (1), unlawfully publishes or
communicates the information to any other person, commits an
offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding two
hundred thousand penalty units or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding two years, or to both.
PART II
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
8.
(1) The funds of the Authority shall consist of such moneys
as may—
(a) be appropriated to the Authority by Parliament for the
purposes of the Authority;
(b) be paid to the Authority by way of fees, charges, grants
or donations; and
(c) otherwise vest in or accrue to the Authority.
(2)
The Authority may—
(a) accept moneys by way of grants or donations from any
source in Zambia and subject to the approval of the
Minister, from any source outside Zambia;
372
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Disclosure
of interest
Prohibition
of
publication
of, or
disclosure of,
information
to
unauthorised
persons
Funds of
Authority


--- PAGE 109 ---

(b) subject to the approval of the Minister, raise by way of
loans or otherwise, such moneys as it may require for
the discharge of its functions; and
(c) in accordance with the regulations made under this Act,
charge fees for services provided by the Authority.
(3)
There shall be paid from the funds of the Authority—
(a) salaries, allowances, loans, gratuities and pensions of staff
of the Authority, catchment councils, sub-catchment
councils and water users associations and other
payments for the recruitment and retention of staff;
(b) such reasonable travelling and subsistence allowances
for members, members of any committee of the
Authority, and members of a catchment council, sub-
catchment council and water users association, when
engaged on the business of the Authority and at such
rates as the Authority may, with the approval of the
Minister, determine; and
(c) any other expenses incurred by the Authority in the
performance of its functions.
(4)
The Minister shall prescribe what proportion of the charges
collected for water use by the Authority shall be given to sub-
catchment councils and catchment councils for the management
of water resources in the subcatchment and catchment.
(5)
The Authority may, after the approval of the Minister, invest
in such manner as it thinks fit such of its funds as it does not
immediately require for the discharge of its functions.
9.
The financial year of the Authority shall be the period of
twelve months ending on 31st December of each year.
10.
(1) The Authority shall cause to be kept proper books of
account and other records relating to its accounts.
(2)
The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by
the Auditor-General or such independent auditors as the Auditor-
General may approve.
(3)
The auditor’s fees shall be paid by the Authority.
11.
(1) As soon as practicable, but not later than ninety days
after the end of the financial year, the Authority shall submit to the
Minister a report concerning its activities during the financial year.
(2)
The report referred to in sub-paragraph (1), shall include
information on the financial affairs of the Authority and there shall
be appended to the report—
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
373
Financial
year
Accounts
Annual
Report


--- PAGE 110 ---

(a) an audited balance sheet;
(b) an audited statement of income and expenditure; and
(c) such other information as the Minister may require.
(3)
The Minister shall not later than seven days after the first
sitting of the National Assembly next after receipt of the report
referred to in subparagraph (1), lay the report before the National
Assembly.
SECOND SCHEDULE
(Section 180 (2))
SAVINGS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
1.
On the appointed date, reference in any written law or any
other legal document to the Water Board shall be read and construed
as references to the Authority established by section seven of this
Act.
2.
(1) The Water Board constituted under section twenty three
of the repealed Act shall continue in office for a period of three
months from the appointed date.
(2)
Subject to sub-paragraph (1), from the appointed date the
Water Board shall exist only for the purpose of winding-up the
affairs of the Board and handing over, through the secretary, of all
assets, files and pending work of the Board to the authority, and for
no other purpose.
3.
(1) On or after the appointed date, there shall be transferred
to, vest in and subsist against the Authority by virtue of this Act and
without further assurance—
(a) the affairs of the Board; and
(b) subject to this Act, all property, rights and obligations which
immediately before the appointed date were the
property, rights and obligations of the Board.
(2)
Except as provided in this Act, every deed, bond and
agreement, other than an agreement for personnel service, to which
the Government was a party immediately before the appointed
date, whether or not of such a nature that rights, liabilities and
obligations could be assigned, shall, unless its subject matter or
terms make it impossible that it should have effect as modified, as
provided under this paragraph, have effect as if—
(a) the Authority had been party to it;
374
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
References
to Water
Board
Dissolution
of Water
Board
Vesting of
assets and
liabilities


--- PAGE 111 ---

(b) for any reference to the Government  there was substituted,
with respect to anything falling to be done on or after
the commencement of this Act, a reference to the
Authority; or
(c) for any reference to any officer of the Board, not being a
party to it and beneficially interested, there were
substituted, as respects anything falling to be done on or
after the commencement of this Act, a reference to
such officer of the Authority as the Authority shall
designate.
(3)
Where under this Act, any assets, rights, liabilities and
obligations of the Government are deemed to be transferred to the
Authority in respect of which transfer a written law provides for
registration, the Authority shall make an application in writing to
the appropriate registration authority for registration of the transfer.
(4)
The registration authority, referred to in subparagraph (3),
shall make such entries in the appropriate register as shall give
effect to the transfer and, where applicable, issue to the transferee
concerned a certificate of title in respect of the property or make
necessary amendments to the register and shall endorse the deeds
relating to the title, right or obligation concerned and no registration
fees or other duties shall be payable in respect of the transaction.
4.
(1) Where under this Act, any property, rights, liabilities
and obligations of the Government incurred, held or vested by or in
the Water Board are deemed transferred to the Authority in respect
of which transfer a written law provides for registration, the
Authority shall make an application in writing to the appropriate
registration authority for registration of the transfer.
(2)
The registration authority referred to in subparagraph (1),
shall make such entries in the appropriate register as shall give
effect to such transfer and, where applicable, issue to the transferee
concerned a certificate of title in respect of the property or make
necessary amendments to the register, as the case may be, and
shall endorse the deeds relating to the title, right or obligation
concerned, and no registration fees or other duties shall be payable
in respect thereof.
5.
(1) Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act,
where any right, liability or obligation vests in the Authority by virtue
of this Act, the Authority and all other persons shall, as from the
appointed date, have the same rights, powers and remedies and in
particular the same rights as to the instituting or defending of legal
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
375
Registration
of property
to be
transferred
by
Government
Legal
proceedings


--- PAGE 112 ---

proceedings or the making or resisting of applications to any authority
for ascertaining or perfecting that right, liability or obligations as
they would have had if it had at all times been a right, liability or
obligation of the Authority.
(2)
Any legal proceedings or applications pending immediately
before the appointed date by or against the Government in respect
of the Water Board may be continued by or against the Authority.
(3)
After the commencement of this Act, proceedings in respect
of any right, liability or obligation which was vested in, held, enjoyed,
incurred or suffered by the Government in respect of the Water
Board may be instituted by or against the Authority.
6.
(1) On or after the appointed date, the Authority shall, on
such terms and conditions as it may, with the approval of the Minister,
determine, appoint as officers of the Authority such employees of,
or public officers from, the Water Board as may be necessary for
the performance of the functions of the Authority.
(2)
Where an officer from the Public Service is appointed to
the service of the Authority under subparagraph (1)—
(a) the terms and conditions of service with the Authority
shall not be less favourable than those the officer enjoyed
in the Public Service; and
(b) the officer shall be deemed to have retired under section
thirty-nine of the Public Service Pensions Act.
(3)
On or after the appointed date employees of the Water
Board who are not engaged by the Authority under subsection (2),
shall be retained by the Government and shall—
(a) be re-deployed in the service of the Government; or
(b) be retired under section thirty-nine of the Public Service
Pensions Act.
7.
(1) Every person claiming any existing right granted under
an order of the Water Board may, within twentyfour months from
the appointed date, notify the Authority of the claim in accordance
with subparagraph (3).
(2)
Every existing right shall terminate if the person entitled to
it fails to notify the Authority, in accordance with subparagraph (1),
of the existence of that right before the expiration of the period
specified in that subparagraph.
(3)
Any person claiming an existing right, in accordance with
subparagraph (1), shall, when notifying the Authority of the right,
file a report with the Authority describing—
376
No. 21 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
Terms of
service of
employees
of Water
Board
Act No. 35
of 1996
Existing
rights under
order of
Water Board
Act No. 35
of 1996


--- PAGE 113 ---

(a) the volume of water abstracted under an order of the
Water Board;
(b) the water source from which the abstraction is made;
(c) the use for which the abstraction is made;
(d) the date upon which the abstraction commenced; and
(e) any existing works constructed for the enjoyment of the
right granted under the repealed Act.
(4)
On receipt by the Authority of a notification under this
paragraph the Authority shall—
(a) carry out such investigations, through public consultations,
with relevant stakeholders, in which the holder of the
right shall have the right to be present and be heard, as
may be necessary to establish the existence of the right
and determine whether the holder of the right used the
right in conformity with the repealed Act; an
(b) if it is satisfied of the existence of that right and that the
holder of  the right used the right in conformity with the
repealed Act, record the right and issue a permit under
this Act for the same use of water, under conditions
provided under this Act.
8.
Notwithstanding any other law, all water works constructed
or boreholes drilled prior to the appointed date shall be treated as if
constructed or drilled under this Act and shall be subject to this
Act.
THIRD SCHEDULE
(Section 54)
PART 1
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS
1.
Revised Southern African Development Protocol on Shared
Watercourses, 2000;
2.
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance
Especially as Water Fowl Habitat, 1971;
3.
Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992;
4.
Convention on Sustainable Management of Lake Tanganyika,
2003,
5.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
1992;
Water Resources Management   
   [No. 21 of 2011
377
Existing
works


--- PAGE 114 ---

378
No. 
 of 2011]
 Water Resources Management
6.
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in
those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and Desertification,
particularly in Africa, 1994;
7.
African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, 1968;
8.
Agreement on the Action Plan for the Environmentally Sound
Management of the Common Zambezi River System, 1987; and
9.
Zambezi River Authority Agreement, 1987.
PART II
EXISTING REGIONAL INSTITUTIONS
1.
Zambezi River Authority; and
2.
Lake Tanganyika Authority.
