

--- PAGE 1 ---

 
 
CHAPTER 20:24  
WATER ACT  
Acts 31/1998, 22/2001 (s. 4), 13/2002 (s. 142), 14/2002 (s. 26), 6/2005 (s 27).  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY 
Section  
1. 
Short title 
2. 
Interpretation.  
3. 
Water vested in President.  
4. 
No private ownership of water.  
5. 
Act not to affect certain rights of miners and prospectors to water.  
6. 
General functions of Minister.  
7. 
Secretary and other officers.  
8. 
Delegation of powers by Minister and Secretary.  
9. 
Powers of officers.  
10. Powers in respect of hydrological stations.  
PART II  
WATER RESOURCES PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT  
11. Declaration of river systems.  
12. Preparation of outline plans.  
13. Contents of outline plans.  
14. Powers of Secretary with respect to outline plan.  
15. Publication of outline plans.  
16. Procedure after publication of outline plans.  
17. Changes to approved outline plans.  
18. Effect of operative outline plans.  
19. Review of operative outline plans.  
PART III  
ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONS AND PROCEDURES OF CATCHMENT COUNCILS  
20. Establishment of catchment councils.  
21. Functions of catchment councils.  
22. Powers of catchment councils.  
23. Principles to be observed by catchment councils in considering applications for Permits for use of water.  
24. Establishment and functions of subcatchment councils.  
25. Persons interested in matters before catchment council.  
26. Costs.  
27. Orders of catchment council.  
28. Catchment manager.  
29. Powers of catchment managers.  
30. Services by National Water Authority to catchment councils.  
31. Inspections.  
PART IV  
USE OF WATER  


--- PAGE 2 ---

32. Use of water for primary purposes.  
33. Power of catchment council to limit quantity of water abstracted for primary purposes.  
34. Application for permit.  
35. Authority to sink boreholes for any purpose or wells for purposes other than primary purposes.  
36. Period of validity of permit.  
37. Permits to pass to new owner.  
38. Permit not transferable except with consent of council.  
  
39. Minister may direct National Water Authority to apply for permit.  
40. Construction of works necessary for enjoyment of rights to use water.  
41. Amendment of permits to abstract, control, divert, store or use water.  
42. Reporting of existing storage works, boreholes and wells.  
43. Records of amount of water abstracted to be maintained.  
44. Restriction on cession of right to use water, or sale or use of, water.  
45. Change of course of public stream.  
46. Application for permits to conduct operations in public streams.  
47. Consent of Minister to be obtained for water storage works of certain size.  
48. Safeguarding interests of occupants of Communal Land.  
49. Decisions of catchment council affecting water supply for primary purposes in Communal Land.  
50. Grant of final, provisional or temporary permits.  
51. Certain permits to enjoy preference over other rights to use water.  
52. Disposal of water after use.  
53. Allocation or apportionment of permits on consolidation or subdivision of land.  
54. Rights to use water when volume thereof insufficient to satisfy demand.  
55. Responsibility for maintenance of water works.  
56. Reservation of areas likely to be required for dam basins or dam sites.  
57. Reservation of water.  
58. Water development restriction areas.  
59. Investigation of use of water by National Water Authority.  
60. Conferring of powers of catchment councils on urban councils.  
PART V  
WATER SHORTAGE AREAS  
61. Declaration of water shortage areas.  
62. Powers of catchment council in respect of water shortage areas.  
63. Sinking, deepening or altering of boreholes and wells in ground water shortage areas restricted.  
64. Maximum volume and rate of abstraction of water in water shortage areas.  
65. Measuring and recording of water abstracted in water shortage areas.  
66. Minister may delegate powers under this Part to local authorities.  
PART VI  
WATER QUALITY CONTROL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
67. Water resource management to be consistent with environmental approaches.  
68. [Repealed].  
69. [Repealed].  
70. [Repealed].  
71. [Repealed].  
PART VII  
SERVITUDES IN RESPECT OF WATER  
72. Interpretation in Part VII.  
73. Acquisition of servitudes otherwise than in terms of Part VIII permissible.  
74. Certain persons may claim servitudes and enter on land.  
75. Method of claiming servitudes.  


--- PAGE 3 ---

76. Rights, privileges and obligations of interested parties at hearings of claims or issues of compensation.  
77. Powers of Administrative Court in regard to claims or issues of compensation.  
78. Rights of owners of land subject to servitudes of passage.  
79. Rights of owners of land subject to servitudes of storage.  
80. Rights included in servitudes.  
81. Lapse of servitudes.  
82. Holders of servitudes to construct, maintain and repair water works.  
83. Holders of servitudes awarded by Administrative Court.  
84. Registration of servitudes acquired by agreement.  
85. Registration of servitudes in Deeds Registry.  
PART VIII  
COMBINED WATER SCHEMES  
86. Interpretation.  
87. Petitions for schemes.  
88. Investigation and report on petition.  
89. Consideration of petition by catchment council.  
90. Powers and duties of catchment council in relation to petitions.  
91. Allocation of water by catchment council for use in schemes.  
92. Alteration of areas within, or quantities of water allocated in respect of, schemes.  
93. Allocation of water to pieces of land in combined water schemes may be cancelled or revised.  
94. Liability of owners of land benefiting from schemes.  
95. Allocation or apportionment of rights to use of water on consolidation or subdivision of land in scheme area.  
PART IX  
SAFETY OF DAMS  
96. Interpretation in Part IX.  
97. Minister may grant exemptions.  
98. Approved civil engineers and approved civil engineering technicians.  
99. When dam works in respect of small dams may be commenced.  
100. Duties of owners on completion of dam works in respect of small dams and registration.  
101. Reporting of small dams in certain areas.  
102. When dam works in respect of large dams may be commenced.  
103. Supervision of dam works in respect of large dams.  
104. Duties of owners on completion of dam works in respect of large dams and registration.  
105. Periodic inspections of large dams.  
106. Secretary may appoint council of consultants.  
107. Secretary may require owner to carry out dam works.   
108. Rights of access, inspection, investigation and survey.  
109. Procedure in emergencies.  
110. Procedure in emergencies arising during execution of dam works.  
111. Exemption from liability.  
PART X  
APPEALS  
112. Interpretation in Part X.  
113. Composition of Administrative Court for purposes of this Act.  
114. Appeals against decisions of authority.  
PART XI  
GENERAL  
115. Maintenance of registers and other records.  
116. Service of notices, orders and other documents.  
117. Validity of defective notices, orders and other documents.  
118. Offences and penalties.  


--- PAGE 4 ---

119. Regulations.  
120. Savings in relation to Zambezi River Authority. PART XII  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
121. Interpretation in Part XII.  
122. Repeal.  
123. Continuation of river board and succession by catchment councils.  
124. Cancellation of and transitional provision in relation to existing water rights.  
125. Matters pending before Administrative Court.  
126. Saving of regulations, etc.  
SCHEDULE  
Powers of Officers.  
AN ACT to provide for the development and utilisation of the water resources of Zimbabwe;  to provide 
for the establishment, powers and procedures of catchment councils and subcatchment councils;  to provide 
for the grant of permits for the use of water;  to provide for the control of the use of water when water is in 
short supply; to provide for the acquisition of servitudes in respect of water;  to provide for the protection of 
the environment and the prevention and control of water pollution;  to provide for the approval of combined 
water schemes;  to provide for matters relating to dam works;  to repeal the Water Act [Chapter 20:22];  and 
to provide for matters incidental to or connected with the foregoing.  
[Date of commencement : 1st January, 2000]  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1 
Short title  
This Act may be cited as the Water Act [Chapter 20:24].  
2 
Interpretation  
(1)  In this Act—  
“Agricultural and Rural Development Authority” means the Agricultural and Rural Development Authority 
established by section 3 of the Agricultural and Rural Development Authority Act [Chapter 18:01];  
“agricultural purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of water for—  
 (a) the irrigation of land;  or  
(b) fish farming purposes;  or  
(c) animal husbandry, including the keeping of poultry, where the amount of water used exceeds ten thousand 
litres per day;  
“appropriate Minister”, in relation to any particular matter, means—  
(a) any Minister who, by or in terms of any enactment, is empowered or required to exercise any function in 
respect of the matter;  or  
(b) a vice-president where, by or in terms of any enactment, the vice-president is empowered or required to 
exercise any function in respect of the matter;  
“aquatic ecosystems” means riverine flora and fauna and aquatic life;  
“aquifer” means any geological formation which absorbs, stores and transmits water;  
“area under jurisdiction of a local authority” means—  
(a) in the case of a municipal council, the municipal area;  
(b) in the case of a town council, the town council area;  
(c) subject to paragraph (b) of subsection (2), in the case of rural district council, the rural district council area;  
(d) in the case of a local board, the area for which the board has been declared in terms of subsection (2);  
“borehole” means a hole drilled or sunk into the ground for the purpose of the abstraction of ground water, the 
collection of ground water or rock samples, the monitoring of ground water levels, or other purposes;  
[Definition inserted by section 26 of Act 14 of 2002]  
“catchment area” means the area which naturally drains into a dam, lake, reservoir, river or watercourse and 
from which the dam, lake, reservoir, river or watercourse receives surface or ground flow which originates 
from rainfall;  
“catchment council” means a catchment council established in terms of section twenty;    
“catchment manager” means a person appointed as catchment manager in terms of section twenty-eight;  


--- PAGE 5 ---

“Director of Physical Planning” means the Director of Physical Planning appointed in terms of section 63 of 
the Regional, Town and Country Planning Act [Chapter 29:12];  
“electrical purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of water for the purposes of an electricity 
undertaking;  
“electricity undertaking” means any undertaking which generates and additionally, or alternatively, transmits, 
distributes or supplies electricity, with all the assets and liabilities appertaining thereto, whether such 
undertaking is under the control of the State, the Zambezi River Authority, the Zimbabwe Electricity 
Supply Authority, a local authority, a company or other association of persons or a private individual;  
“existing permit” means an existing permit or right to use water granted in terms of this Act or of any enactment 
repealed by this Act or any predecessor of such enactment;  
“feedlot” means one or more enclosures or other structures on any piece of land in which animals or poultry 
are confined within a restricted area and fed mainly or entirely by means other than natural browsing, 
grazing for the purpose of bringing them into slaughter condition or maintaining their condition;  
“final permit” means a permit for the use of water granted in terms section thirty-four;  
“ground water” means all water which is—  
(a) beneath the surface of the ground; and  
(b) not visible on the land concerned;   
and includes water in boreholes and wells;  
“hydrological station” means a place where measurements and observations of the flow or level of any surface 
or ground water are taken or made, as the case may be, and recorded;  
“institutional purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of such water for—  
(a) boarding-houses, guest farms, hotels and other like enterprises; or  
(b) recreational clubs;  or  
(c) missions or boarding-schools;  or  
(d) a permanent labour force which, excluding the dependants of the labourers concerned, exceeds one hundred 
workers;  
“irrigable area” means an area of land under or capable of being brought under irrigation; “irrigation” 
means the artificial application of water to land for agricultural purposes;  
“local authority” means—  
(a) a municipal council, town council or rural district council;  or  
(b) a local board declared in terms of subsection (2) to be a local authority;  
“local authority purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of water for the purposes of the 
community within the area under the jurisdiction of a local authority and of such other persons as may 
conveniently be supplied with water by the local authority;  
“mining purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of water for mining purposes;  
“Minister” means the Minister of Rural Resources and Water Development or any other Minister to whom the 
President may, from time to time, assign the administration of this Act;  
“miscellaneous purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of water for any purposes other than 
agricultural purposes, electrical purposes, institutional purposes, local authority purposes, mining 
purposes, primary purposes, railway purposes, road purposes or local authority purposes;  
“National Water Authority” means the Zimbabwe National Water Authority established by section 3 of the 
Zimbabwe National Water Authority Act, 1998;  
“non-riparian owner” means an owner of land which is not riparian land;  
“officer” means an officer appointed in terms of subsection (1) of section seven and includes the Secretary;  
“outline plan” means an outline water development plan prepared in terms of subsection (1) of section twelve;  
“owner” in relation to land, includes—  
(a) the State;  and  
(b) the person registered in the Deeds Registry as the owner of the land or in whom the land is vested by law;  and  
(c) any person lawfully holding or occupying land in accordance with any agreement or enactment empowering 
the State to allot land on the promise of title subject to the fulfilment by the allottee of certain conditions;  and  
(d) in the case of land owned or controlled and managed by the Forestry Commission, the Forestry Commission;  
and  
(e) in the case of Communal Land, the Minister responsible for administration of the Communal Land Act 
[Chapter 20:04];  and  
(f) 
the legal representative of an owner of land who has died or become insolvent or is a minor or of unsound 
mind or otherwise under disability;  and  
(g) the liquidator of an owner of land which is a company;  
“permit” means a permit for the use of water issued in terms of this Act;  


--- PAGE 6 ---

“pollution”, in relation to water, means—  
(a) such contamination or other alteration of the biological chemical or physical properties of the water, including 
changes in colour, odour, taste, temperature or turbidity;  or  
(b) such discharge of any gaseous, liquid, solid or other substances into any water or public stream;  as will or is 
likely to create a nuisance or render the water, as the case may be, detrimental harmful or injurious to the 
health, safety or welfare of the public or any section thereof or any consumer or user of the water or any birds, 
fish or other aquatic ecosystems, livestock or wild life;  
“primary purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the reasonable use of water—  
(a) for basic domestic human needs in or about the area of residential premises;  or  
(b) for the support of animal life, other than fish in fish farms or animals or poultry in feedlots;  
(c) for the making of bricks for the private use of the owner, lessee or occupier of the land concerned;  or  
(d) for dip tanks;  
“provisional permit” means a permit for the use of water granted in terms of section fifty;  
“public stream” means a water course of natural origin in which water flows, whether or not—  
  
(a) the watercourse or any portion thereof is dry during any period of the year;  or   
(b) 
the conformation of the watercourse has been changed by artificial means;  
“railway purposes”, in relation to the use of water, means the use of water by any person authorized to operate 
a railway system for the purpose of that operation;   
“Regional Water Authority” means the Regional Water Authority which was established under section 3 of the 
repealed Regional Water Authority Act [Chapter 20:06];  
“Registrar” means the Registrar of the Administrative Court;  
“riparian land” means land on which, or along the boundary of the whole or any portion of which, a public 
stream exists;  
“riparian owner” means the owner of riparian land;  
“river system” means a river system declared as such in terms of subsection (1) of section eleven;  
“Secretary” means the Secretary of the Ministry for which the Minister is responsible;  
“subcatchment council” means a subcatchment council established in terms of section twenty-one;   
“surface water” means all water found on or below the bed of a public stream, including marshes, springs, 
swamps or vleis forming the source of or found on the course of the public stream, and includes water in 
storage works, drainage works or permanent pools;  
“temporary permit” means a permit for the use of water granted in terms of section fifty;  
“water” includes—  
(a) surface water;  and  
(b) all water which rises naturally on any private land or drains or falls naturally on to any private land, even if it 
does not visibly join any public stream;  and  
(c) all ground water;  
“water development restriction area” means an area declared in terms of subsection (1) of section fifty-eight to 
be a water development restriction area;  
“water storage works” means a dam, reservoir or well;  
“water works” means—  
(a) a borehole, canal, channel, embankment, filter, filterbed, pipeline, pumping plant purification plant, plant for 
the generation of hydro-electric power, water storage works or well;  or  
(b) any accessory, apparatus, appliance, fitting, machinery or other thing constructed, erected or used for or in 
connection with the abstraction, control, diversion, drainage, filtration, passage, purification, storage, supply 
or use of water, including effluent or waste water or the conservation of rainfall or the development of water 
power;  or  
(c) any land occupied for or in connection with the abstraction, control, diversion, drainage, filtration, passage, 
purification, storage, supply or use of water, including effluent or waste water; or  
(d) any gauge post, measuring weir or other appliance erected or used for undertakings authorised by or in terms 
of this Act;  
  
and includes any area held, occupied or required for the purpose of irrigation;  
“well” means a hole dug into the ground for the purpose of the abstraction of ground water and includes a mine 
shaft and any other subterraneous works other than a borehole used for such purpose.  
[Definition substituted by section 26 of Act 14 of 2002]  
(2)  The Minister, by notice in the Gazette—  


--- PAGE 7 ---

(a) with the approval of the Minister to whom the administration of the Urban Councils Act [Chapter 29:15] has 
been assigned, may declare a local board to be a local authority for the purposes of this Act, and shall specify 
the area which shall be the area under the local board’s jurisdiction for the purposes of this Act  
(b) with the approval of the Minister to whom the administration of the Rural District Councils Act [Chapter 29:13] 
has been assigned, may declare a greater or lesser area than the council area to be the area under the jurisdiction 
of a rural district council for the purposes of this Act.  
3 
Water vested in President  
Subject to this Act, all water is vested in the President.  
4 
No private ownership of water  
(1) No person shall be entitled to ownership of any water in Zimbabwe and no water shall be stored, 
abstracted, apportioned, controlled, diverted, used or in any way dealt with except in accordance with this 
Act.  
(2) Subject to this Act, a permit issued in terms of this Act shall confer upon its holder a right to the 
use of water in accordance with the permit.  
5 
Act not to affect certain rights of miners and prospectors to water  
Nothing in this Act shall affect the rights conferred on holders of mining locations or prospectors by the  
Mines and Minerals Act [Chapter 21:05] in respect of the use of—  
 (a) water for primary purposes;  or  (b) 
ground water.  
6 
General functions of Minister  
(1) For the purposes of this Act, the functions of the Minister shall be—  
(a) to develop policies to guide the orderly and integrated planning of the optimum development, utilization and 
protection of the country’s water resources in the national interest;  and  
(b) to ensure the availability of water to all citizens for primary purposes and to meet the needs of aquatic and 
associated ecosystems particularly when there are competing demands for water;  and  
(c) to ensure the equitable and efficient allocation of the available water resources in the national interest for the 
development of the rural, urban, industrial, mining and agricultural sectors.  
(2) In the performance of his functions in terms of subsection (1), it shall be the duty of the Minister—  
(a) to provide overall policy guidelines on the development, exploitation and utilization of water resources,  
ensuring that all components of the water cycle such as ground water surface water, evaporation, clouds 
and rainfall are recognized as being interdependent and forming part of a single water cycle;  
(b) to ensure that water resources are managed, utilized and conserved in a manner consistent with  national 
environmental approaches provided for in any enactment;  
(c) to encourage participation by consumers in all the sectors referred to in paragraph (c) of subsection (1) and 
catchment councils in the development, exploitation and distribution of water resources;  
(d) to secure the provision of affordable water to consumers in under-privileged communities;  
(e) to ensure that water resources are utilized at all times in an efficient manner having special regard to its value 
and the economic and other benefits that may be derived from it;  
(f) to give effect to any international agreement, to which Zimbabwe is a party, on shared water course systems in 
a spirit of mutual co-operation;  
(g) to ensure that research is carried out and information is obtained and kept, on hydrological and hydrogeological 
matters such as—  
(i) 
the quality and quantity of the country’s water resources;  
(ii) 
the utilization of the country’s water resources;  
(iii) resources needed to develop the country’s water resources sufficient to meet the reasonable needs of the 
nation;  
(h) to promote efficiency and economy in the utilization of water resources and to encourage the use of water-
saving technologies;  
(i) to regulate the supply of water by any person to consumers with respect to—  
(i) the quality of the service provided to consumers;  and   (ii) the protection of consumers from 
exploitation;  
  
 without, however, impairing the efficiency of the person’s operations;   
(j) to fix criteria for water allocation and the issue of permits for the use of water by catchment 
councils;  
(k) generally, to fix standards to be maintained in the exploitation, utilization, conservation and 
management of water resources in respect of environmental water quality standards as set by 


--- PAGE 8 ---

the Minister responsible for the administration of the Environmental Management Act 
[Chapter20:27].  
[Paragraph amended by section 142 of Act 13 of 2002 and by section 27 of Act 6 of 2005]]  
7 
Secretary and other officers  
(1) Subject to the Public Service Act [Chapter 16:04],  there shall be appointed, in addition to the 
Secretary, such other officers as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In the exercise of their functions under this Act, officers shall be subject to the directions and 
orders of the Minister.   
8 
Delegation of powers by Minister and Secretary  
(1) The Minister may delegate to the Secretary or to the National Water Authority such of his functions 
under this Act as he thinks fit, other than the functions conferred on him by section one hundred and 
nineteen.  
(2) The Secretary may delegate to any other officer or to the National Water Authority such 
functions—   
(a) conferred or imposed on him by or in terms of this Act;  or  
  
(b) delegated to him in terms of subsection (1);  
as he thinks fit:  
Provided that he shall not so delegate any function delegated to him in terms of subsection (1) without the consent 
of the Minister.  
(3) All functions delegated by the Secretary in terms of subsection (2) shall be exercised and carried 
out subject to the directions and orders of the Secretary.  
9 
Powers of officers  
(1) Subject to this Act, an officer may, for the better conservation and use of the water resources of 
Zimbabwe or for the control or prevention of the pollution of water, do all or any of the things set out in 
the Schedule.  
(2) A person to whom an order referred to in paragraph 5 of the Schedule has been given may, within 
a period of twenty-one days from the date on which the order was given to him, if aggrieved by the order, 
appeal against the order to the Administrative Court.  
(3) Subject to subsection (2), a person who fails to comply with the order referred to in paragraph 5 
of the Schedule within the period specified in the order shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not 
exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
10 Powers in respect of hydrological stations  
(1) If the Minister or the National Water Authority—  
(a) wishes to construct or maintain a hydrological station on any land;  and  
(b) is unable to agree on reasonable terms with the owner of the land referred to in paragraph (a) concerning the 
construction or maintenance referred to in that paragraph;  
the Minister or, as the case may be, the National Water Authority with the consent of the Minister,  may, subject to 
subsection (2), compulsorily acquire such land or rights or interests over land as are necessary to construct or 
maintain a hydrological station on the land concerned.  
(2) Parts III, V and VIII of the Land Acquisition Act [Chapter 20:10] shall apply, mutatis mutandis, 
to the exercise by the Minister or the National Water Authority of powers in terms of subsection (1).  
PART II  
WATER RESOURCES PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT  
11 Declaration of river system  
(1) The Minister, after consultation with the National Water Authority may, by statutory instrument, 
declare any catchment area, group of catchment areas and any aquifer in the area concerned to be a river 
system.  
(2) A river system shall, subject to this Act, be under the control of a catchment council established 
in respect of it in terms of subsection (1) of section twenty, which shall be subject to the general supervision 
of the National Water Authority.   
12 Preparation of outline plans  
(1) For the purpose of ensuring the optimum development and utilization of the water resources of 
Zimbabwe, the National Water Authority, and the catchment council concerned, shall prepare an outline 
water development plan for every river system.   


--- PAGE 9 ---

(2) In preparing an outline plan, the National Water Authority and the catchment council concerned 
shall—  
(a) consult the authorities and bodies which in its opinion are likely to be concerned with the development of the 
catchment area or catchment areas of the river system concerned and the utilization of its water resources;  and  
(b) draw up an inventory of the resources of the catchment area or catchment areas of the river system;  and  
(c) have regard to any relevant regional plan prepared in terms of the Regional, Town and Country Planning Act 
[Chapter 29:12], and to such other matters as may appear relevant to it.  
13 Contents of outline plans  
(1) An outline plan shall—  
  
(a) indicate—  
(i) 
the major water uses within the river system concerned, including those of the important public  
utilities, and any major amenity or recreation areas, areas for development and measures for the 
conservation and improvement of the physical environment;  and  
(ii) 
the extent to which the actual volumes or the relative proportions of the potential yield or total annual run off 
of any catchment area within the river system concerned should be apportioned between public and private 
development and the allocation within such apportionment of water for the respective uses of the different 
sectors of the economy referred to in paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of section six; and  
(iii) subject to quality standards as prescribed in terms of the Environmental Management Act [Chapter 20:27]; 
the maximum permissible levels of pollution within the catchment area concerned;  and  
[Subparagraph amended by section 142 of Act 13 of 2002 and by section 27 of Act 6 of 2005]  
(iv) the manner in which its proposals are justified by the inventory drawn up in terms of subsection (2) of section 
twelve;  and  
(v) 
the phasing of any development and the order of priorities in respect of the proposals in the outline plan and 
the reasons therefor;  
  
 and  
  
(b) state the relationship of the proposals in the outline plan to such major proposals for the use of water as  
may be—  
(i) expected to affect the catchment area or catchment areas of the river system concerned;  and  
(ii) set out in the outline plans in respect of any contiguous river systems;    and  
  
(c) specify—  
(i) 
any area comprising a potential dam site, dam basin or both which should be reserved against the doing of 
such acts referred to in subsection (1) of section fifty-six as may be specified in the outline plan;  and  
(ii) the proportion of the available water in any catchment area within the river system concerned  
which should be reserved for an indefinite period for future use or for the benefit of the 
environment, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the outline plan;  
  
 and  
 (d) deal with such matters, other than the matters referred to in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), as the Minister may 
prescribe.  
(2) The National Water Authority shall clearly indicate in an outline plan the priorities in the 
utilization and allocation of water, taking into account policy guidelines provided by the Minister.   
(3) An outline plan shall make provision for changes in priorities for the use, development and 
allocation of water, where they are necessitated by changes in the availability of water or social or economic 
priorities.  
(4) An outline plan shall consist of a statement in writing accompanied by such descriptive matter, 
diagrams, illustrations and maps as may be prescribed.  
(5) The National Water Authority shall, after completing an outline plan, refer it to the Secretary for 
examination and recommendation.  
14 Powers of Secretary with respect to outline plan  
(1) The Secretary shall, having regard to any relevant regional plan prepared in terms of Part II of the 
Regional, Town and Country Planning Act [Chapter 29:12]—  
(a) examine and make recommendations to the Minister on an outline plan referred to him in terms of subsection 
(5) of section thirteen, including recommendations on the phasing of any development, the order of priorities 
in respect of the proposals in the outline plan and the allocation of water to the different sectors of the economy;  
and  
(b) assist generally in the consideration of matters relating to planning within the river system and, if appropriate, 
other contiguous river systems.  


--- PAGE 10 ---

(2) The Secretary may consult or obtain evidence from any representative of any local authority, 
statutory body or association of persons engaged in any business, calling, profession or other activity of 
benefit to the public and from any other person who, in the opinion of the Secretary, possesses expert 
knowledge which would be of advantage to the Secretary, the National Water Authority and the catchment 
councils in the exercise of their functions under this Part:  
Provided that the Secretary may direct the catchment council and the National Water Authority to consult or 
obtain evidence from any person specified by him.  
15 Publication of outline plans  
(1) After having examined an outline plan, the Secretary shall submit it, together with his 
recommendations on it, to the Minister.  
(2) On receipt of the outline plan and recommendations submitted in terms of subsection (1) and after 
considering them, the Minister shall—  
(a) give notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area to which the outline plan relates of  
the places at which the outline plan will be publicly exhibited and the period within which objections or 
representations in connection with the outline plan may be made to the Minister;  and  
(b) exhibit at the places and for a period of not less than thirty days copies of the outline plan.  
16 Procedure after publication of outline plans  
(1) The Minister may, if—  


--- PAGE 11 ---

  
  
(a 
) no objections or representations referred to in subsection (2) of section fifteen have been made to him 
within the period specified in the notice referred to in that subsection, approve the plan and fix the date on 
which it shall come into operation;  or  
 (b) objections or representations referred to in subsection (2) of section fourteen have been made to him within the 
period specified in the notice referred to in that subsection, after considering such objections or 
representations—  
(i) 
approve the outline plan and fix the date on which it shall come into operation;  or  
(ii) refer the outline plan concerned, together with the objections or recommendations, to the 
National Water Authority for further consideration.  
(2) After further consideration of an outline plan referred to it in terms of 
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) of subsection (1), the National Water Authority shall, 
after consultation with the Secretary, submit the outline plan, together with any further 
recommendations thereon, to the Minister.  
(3) The further recommendations submitted in terms of subsection (2) shall include 
a report on the objections or representations made in connection with the outline plan 
concerned and on any changes made to the outline plan as a result of the objections or 
representations.  
(4) After considering the outline plan and the further recommendations submitted to 
him in terms of subsection (2), the Minister shall, after taking into account—  (a) any 
evaluation report furnished by the Secretary;  and  
 (b) any matters, other than those referred to in paragraph (a), which he considers to be relevant; and making such 
changes to the outline plan as he thinks fit, approve the outline plan and fix the date on which it shall come into 
operation.  
(5) The Minister shall give notice in the Gazette of his approval of an outline plan 
and of the date on which the outline plan will come into operation.  
17 Changes to approved outline plans  
(1) If it appears to the Minister, on the recommendation of the National Water 
Authority and the Secretary that, an approved outline plan should be changed, the Minister 
shall—  
(a) give notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area to which the approved outline plan 
relates of the proposal to change the approved outline plan and of the places at which the approved 
outline plan embodying the proposed changes will be publicly exhibited and the period within which 
objections or representations in connection with the proposal may be made to the National Water 
Authority;  and  
(b) exhibit for a period of not less than thirty days at the places referred to in paragraph (a) copies of the 
approved outline plan embodying the proposed changes.  
(2) The Minister—  
(a) may, if no objections or representations referred to in subsection (1) have been made within the period 
specified in the notice referred to in that subsection, confirm the proposed changes to the approved 
outline plan concerned and the approved outline plan shall thereafter incorporate such changes;  or  
(b) shall, if objections or representations referred to in subsection (1) have been made within the period 
specified in the notice referred to in that subsection and if he still wishes the approved outline plan 
concerned to be changed, act in terms of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section 
sixteen and subsections (2) to (4) of section sixteen and section seventeen shall apply,  mutatis 
mutandis, thereafter.  
18 Effect of operative outline plans  
(1) Any person, including the State, undertaking development within any catchment 
area of a river system shall in so doing, have regard to the operative outline plan relating 
to the catchment area.  
(2) A catchment council shall not grant any application for a permit for the use of 
water within any area to which an operative outline plan relates if the permit would have 
the effect of granting rights to use more water in the sector of the economy concerned than 
could be satisfied by the allocation of water made by the operative outline plan to that 
sector:  


--- PAGE 12 ---

  
  
(a 
Provided that a catchment council, with the approval of the Secretary, may grant temporary permits for the use 
of the water so allocated on such conditions as the catchment council may specify.  
(2a)  Until such time as an outline plan becomes operative in any river system a catchment council may, with 
the approval of the Secretary and subject to subsection (2b), grant provisional or temporary permits on such 
conditions as the catchment council may specify.  
[Subsection substituted by section 26 of Act 14 of 2002]  
(2b)  As soon as practicable after the date when an outline plan becomes operative in any river system a 
catchment council which granted any provisional or temporary permit in terms of subsection (2a) shall review every 
such permit and cancel, renew or convert it into a final permit upon having regard to  
) whether or not the permit is capable of being granted under the outline plan in terms of subsection (2) of 
section eighteen or its grant is otherwise consistent with the outline plan;  
 (b) the principles to be observed by the catchment council in considering applications for permits for use of water 
in terms of section twenty-three.  
[Subsection substituted by section 26 of Act 14 of 2002]  
(3)  Any area comprising a potential dam basin or potential dam site or both specified in terms of subparagraph 
(i) of paragraph (c) of subsection (1) of section thirteen shall, with effect from the date on which the approved outline 
plan concerned or any change thereto in terms of section seventeen comes into operation, be deemed to be reserved 
in terms of subsection (1) of section fifty-six against the doing of any act specified in the approved outline plan and 
section fifty-six shall apply, mutatis mutandis: Provided that—  
(i) it shall not be necessary to publish any notice in terms of subsection (1) of section fifty-six;  
(ii) the reference in subsection (4) of section fifty-six to the publication in the Gazette of a notice shall be read and 
construed as a reference to the approval in terms of subsection (3) of section sixteen of such approved outline 
plan.  
(4)  The proportion of the potential yield, total annual runoff or available water specified in terms of subsection 
(1) of section thirteen shall, with effect from the date on which the approved outline plan concerned or any change 
thereto in terms of section seventeen comes into operation, be deemed to be reserved in terms of subsection (1) of 
section fifty-seven for an indefinite period for future use subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in 
the approved outline plan, and subsections (1), (2) and (9) of section fifty-seven shall apply, mutatis mutandis:  
Provided that—  
(i) it shall not be necessary to publish any notice in terms of subsection (1) of section fifty-seven;  
(ii) the reference in subsection (9) of section fifty-seven to the publication in the Gazette of a notice shall be read 
and construed as a reference to the approval in terms of subsection (5) of section sixteen of such approved 
outline plan.  
19 Review of operative outline plans  
(1) The National Water Authority shall, within a period of not more than ten years from the date on 
which an approved outline plan came into operation or such other period as the Minister may specify and 
thereafter at intervals of not more than ten years or such other intervals as the Minister may specify, review 
the operative outline plan and decide whether or not a new outline plan should be prepared in terms of 
subsection (1) of section twelve.  
(2) An operative outline plan shall cease to have force on the date on which an approved outline plan 
replacing the operative outline plan comes into operation.  
PART III  
ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONS AND PROCEDURES OF CATCHMENT COUNCILS  
20 Establishment of catchment councils  
(1) The Minister, in consultation with the Zimbabwe National Water Authority may, by statutory 
instrument—  
(a) establish a catchment council in respect of an area of a river system specified in that instrument;  and  
(b) fix the number of members representing water users in the river system who shall constitute the 
catchment council and the manner in which they shall be elected or appointed;  and  
(c) assign a name to the catchment council; and  
(d) prescribe the procedure at the meetings of or to be followed by the catchment council in the discharge 
of its functions;  and  


--- PAGE 13 ---

  
  
(a 
(e) fix the remuneration, if any, and allowances payable to members of a catchment council from funds 
allocated for that purpose from the Water Levy Fund to meet the reasonable expenses incurred by 
members in connection with the business of the catchment council.  
(2) A catchment council shall be a body corporate capable of suing and being sued in its own name 
and, subject to this Act, of performing such functions as a body corporate may by law perform.  
(3) The Minister may, by statutory instrument—  
(a) abolish a catchment council;  or  
(b) subject to subsection (1) of section eleven, alter the area of jurisdiction of a catchment council;  or  
 
(c) alter the membership or the name of a catchment council.  
21 Functions of catchment council  
(1) Subject to this Act, a catchment council shall—  
) in conjunction with the National Water Authority, prepare an outline plan  for its river system in accordance 
with this Act;  and  
(b) determine applications made and grant permits required in terms of this Act;  and  
(c) regulate and supervise the exercise of rights to, and use of, water in respect of the river system for 
which it is established;  and  
(d) to supervise the performance of functions by subcatchment councils;  and  
(e) ensure proper compliance with this Act;  and  
(f) perform any other function conferred or imposed upon it in terms of this Act.  
(2) The Minister may, by written notice to a catchment council, confer all or any of the powers of 
officers upon a catchment manager or on all or any of the members of a catchment council, and may at any 
time amend or revoke any such notice.  
(3) For the better exercise of its functions, a catchment council may delegate to subcatchment councils, 
either absolutely or subject to conditions, such of its functions as it thinks fit: Provided that —  
(i) 
the power to grant permits shall not be delegated to a subcatchment council;  
(ii) the delegation shall not prevent the catchment council from exercising the functions concerned;  
(iii) the catchment council may amend or withdraw any decision of a subcatchment council in the exercise 
of its delegated functions.  
22 Powers of catchment councils  
(1) A catchment council may, subject to this Act and in regard to water within the area of the river 
system for which it is established—  
  
(a) grant an application for—  
(i) 
a permit;  or  
(ii) 
a provisional permit;  or  
(iii) a temporary permit;  
  
 for the use of water subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose or may refuse the application;  
(b) on an application by any person to whom an existing permit has been granted for a revision of an 
existing permit, investigate the matter and make an appropriate order on the matter;  
(c) on an application by any person in regard to—  
  
(i) a dispute concerning the abstraction, appropriation, control, diversion or use of water;  or   (ii) any 
matter which may be brought before a catchment council in terms of this Act;   
 investigate the dispute 
or matter and make an appropriate order;  
(d) at the request of the Minister or the Administrative Court, investigate any matter concerning the 
abstraction, appropriation, control, diversion or use of water and report on the matter;  
(e) at the request of the Minister—  
(i) 
investigate, define and record the right to the use of the water of any channel, reservoir or public 
stream, aquifer or other source of supply;  
(ii) 
in the case of any watercourse the character of which has not already been defined by the 
catchment council, decide whether such watercourse is a public stream or not;  
(iii) report for his information on—  
A. the use or waste of water abstracted from any public stream;  
B. the advisability of interference with or the removal of any dam, weir or other structure 
in the course of a public stream and, if such interference or removal is recommended, 
the compensation, if any, to be paid to any affected person;  
C. any matter arising out of this Act;  


--- PAGE 14 ---

  
  
(a 
(f) at the direction of the Minister, terminate any investigation requested by him in terms of paragraph (d) 
or (e);  
(g) on its own motion, terminate any investigation referred to in paragraph (b) or (c);  
(h) do anything which may be done by a catchment council in terms of this Act or any other enactment.  
(2) In the exercise of any power referred to in subsection (1), a catchment council may—  
(a) make all such inspections as may be necessary;  and  
(b) call and take expert advice on any matter;  and  
(c) without derogation from section ninety-three, revise or cancel any existing permit.  
23 Principles to be observed by catchment council in considering applications for permits for use of 
water  
(1) Subject to section sixty-two and to the priorities in the utilization and allocation of water set out in 
an outline plan in terms of section thirteen, in considering applications for permits for the use of water, a 
catchment council shall—  
  
(a) in the case of more than one application for the use of the same water, have regard to—  


--- PAGE 15 ---

 
  
(i) 
the need to achieve, as far as possible, an equitable distribution of the available water 
resources;    
(ii) 
the needs of each applicant;  and  
(iii) the likely economic and social benefits of the proposed use;   
  
(b) in granting a permit for the use of water for agricultural purposes, have regard to—  
  
(i) the extent and nature of all land, wherever situated, irrigable by the water concerned;  and   (ii) the 
suitability for irrigation of the land concerned;  and  
  
(iii) the efficiency of the proposed method or possible methods of using the water concerned;  
(c) have regard to the economic aspects of the proposed scheme, undertaking or work;  
(d) if the use will result in effluent requiring treatment and disposal, order the applicant to ensure that the 
proposed method of treatment and disposal of the effluent complies with Part VI;   
(e) take into consideration such matters, other than the matters referred to in paragraphs (a) to (d), as may 
appear to be relevant to its investigations.  
(2) Subject to this Act, the Minister, after consultation with the National Water Authority and any 
catchment council concerned, may prescribe—  
(a) the matters which shall be taken into account in considering the respective priority of different uses 
of water;  and   
(b) the manner of allocating water between consumers who have competing needs for water;  and  
 
(c) the methods of allocating water.  
24 Establishment and functions of subcatchment councils  
(1) The Minister may, by statutory instrument—  
(a) establish a subcatchment council for any part of a river system specified in the notice;  and  
(b) fix the number of members who shall constitute a subcatchment council and the manner in which they 
shall be elected;  and  
(c) assign a name to the subcatchment council.  
(2) The Minister may, by a statutory instrument—  
(a) abolish a subcatchment council;  or  
(b) alter the area for which a subcatchment council was established;  or   
(c) alter the 
membership or the name of a subcatchment council.  
(2) A subcatchment council shall be a body corporate capable of suing and being sued in its own name 
and, subject to this Act, of performing such functions as a body corporate may by law perform.  
(3) Subject to this Act and without derogation from the powers of a catchment council, a subcatchment 
council shall—  
  
(a) regulate and supervise the exercise of rights to water within the area for which it was established; and  
 (b) perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it in terms of this Act.  
(4)  With the approval of the Minister, a subcatchment council may -  
(a) levy rates upon persons who hold permits within the area for which the subcatchment council was 
established; and  
(b) charge fees for any service rendered by it.  
(6) Any rates levied or fees charged by a subcatchment council in terms of subsection (5) shall be held 
by the subcathment council in a fund for which proper accounts shall be kept and maintained.  
(7) A subcatchment council shall apply the moneys in the fund referred to in subsection (6) on 
expenses of the subcatchment council in the performance of its functions.  
(8) In the performance of its functions, a subcatchment council may require any holder of a permit 
within the area for which it was established to take such steps as it may specify to maintain in efficient 
repair any water works connected with his permit.  
(9) Any holder of a permit who is aggrieved by a requirement of a subcatchment council in terms of 
subsection (8) may, within thirty days of the requirement, appeal to the Administrative Court in terms of 
Part X.  
(10)If any person fails to comply with a requirement in terms of (8) which has not been set aside in 
terms of subsection (9), the subcatchment council may itself take the steps concerned and recover the cost 
of doing so from such person in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
(11)The Minister may, by written notice to the subcatchment council concerned, confer all or any of 
the powers of officers upon all or any of the members of the subcatchment council, and may at any time 
amend or revoke any such notice.  


--- PAGE 16 ---

 
25 Persons interested in matters before catchment council  
(1) Before proceeding to the determination of any matter submitted to it, a catchment council shall 
satisfy itself that all persons who, in its opinion, have an interest which is reasonably likely to be adversely 
affected by the determination have been duly notified of the proceedings.  
(2) Any person who has an interest in the determination of any matter submitted to a catchment council 
may—  
(a) appear before the catchment council;  and  
(b) present such argument or produce such evidence before the catchment council as he thinks fit.  
(3) An irrigation company shall, if any matter before a catchment council arises wholly or partly within 
the area of the combined water scheme concerned, be taken as having an interest referred to in subsection 
(2).  
26 Costs  
The costs payable in respect of any proceedings before a catchment council shall be as prescribed.  
27 Orders of catchment council  
(1) Subject to this Act, a catchment council may make such award or order on any proceedings brought 
before it as it thinks fit.  
(2) An award or order of a catchment council—  
(a) shall be reduced to writing and a copy thereof, certified by the chairman of the catchment council, 
shall, if such award or order is made on the hearing and determination of a dispute or application, be 
served on each party to the dispute or application, as the case may be;  and  
(b) shall be binding on each party to the dispute or application concerned, if any, unless the award or order 
is set aside on appeal.  
(3) An award or order of a catchment council for the payment of a sum of money by a party to a claim, 
dispute, appeal or application shall have the same effect as an order of the High Court for such payment 
unless such award or order is set aside on appeal:  
Provided that an appeal against the decision of a catchment council shall not suspend the decision, order, award 
or finding appealed against.  
28 Catchment manager  
(1) For the day to day management and administration of the affairs of a catchment council, there shall 
be a catchment manager who shall be an employee of the National Water Authority.  
(2) In the performance of his functions, a catchment manager shall act on the advice of the catchment 
council and shall be supervised by the National Water Authority.  
(3) A catchment council may delegate to the catchment manager any of its functions imposed upon it 
in terms of section twenty-one or twenty-two.  
29 Powers of catchment managers  
(1) Subject to this Act, a catchment manager may, if the catchment council is not meeting—   
(a) 
on an unopposed application or claim—   (i) grant permits for the use of water;  
(ii) 
extend the duration of a temporary permit or provisional permit;  
(iii) grant interdicts in respect of matters cognizable by a catchment council;  
(iv) cancel existing permits;  
(v) 
subject to section 11 of the Communal Land Act [Chapter 20:04], award servitudes;  
(vi) grant an application made in terms of section forty-one, forty-six or fifty-three;    and  
  
(b) on an opposed or unopposed application—  
(i) 
postpone or further postpone the consideration of the matter;  
(ii) 
cause any investigation which he considers necessary for the determination of the matter to 
be carried out;  
(iii) authorize the proof of all or any of any facts in a matter by affidavit;  
(iv) on such conditions as to costs or otherwise as he thinks fit, authorize an applicant to withdraw 
his application:  
   Provided that a catchment manager may not exercise any of the powers set out in this paragraph on an opposed 
application unless the applicant has given notice of his application to the person opposing the 
application;  
 (c) exercise, mutatis mutandis, the powers referred to in paragraphs (f) and (g) of subsection (1) of section twenty-
two.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the parties to a dispute may, if they so wish, state the dispute 
in writing signed by or on behalf of each party and submit the dispute to the catchment manager for 
consideration and decision.  


--- PAGE 17 ---

 
(3) Any decision made by a catchment manager on a dispute submitted to him in terms of subsection 
(2) shall—  
(a) have the same force;  and  
(b) be subject to appeal in the same manner; as if it were a decision of a 
catchment council.  
30 Services by National Water Authority to catchment councils  
The National Water Authority shall provide secretarial, administrative, clerical and technical services to 
catchment councils.  
[Section substituted by section 26 of Act 14 of 2002]  
31 Inspections  
(1) Any member of a catchment council may, for the purpose of—  
(a) enforcing this Act in circumstances where there are reasonable grounds for believing that the search 
or entry is necessary for the prevention, investigation or detection of a criminal offence;  or  
(b) protecting the rights and freedoms of other persons;  
at all reasonable times enter upon any land and, after having informed the person who is for the time being in charge 
of the land of the purpose of his visit, make such inspection and inquiry as he may consider necessary for the proper 
enforcement of this Act.  
(2) If any person without just cause refuses to permit a member of a catchment council to conduct any 
inspection or inquiry in terms of subsection (1), or hinders or obstructs a member of a catchment council in 
the exercise of his powers in terms of subsection (1), he shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not 
exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
(3) In addition to the penalties specified in subsection (2), the refusal, hindering or obstruction of a 
member of a catchment council in the exercise of his powers in terms of subsection (1) shall afford a ground 
for refusing the grant of any permit in terms of this Act or the rescinding of any existing permit.  
(4) A catchment council may delegate its functions in terms of this section to an officer, the catchment 
manager or any other employee of the National Water Authority, and subsections (2) and (3) shall apply 
mutatis mutandis.  
PART IV  
USE OF WATER  
32 Use of water for primary purposes  
(1) Subject to section thirty-three and Part IX, any person may abstract water for primary purposes:  
Provided that this subsection shall not be construed as conferring on any person a right, which he would not 
otherwise possess, to enter or occupy any land for the purpose of abstracting the water.  
(2) A person who intends to construct water storage works capable of storing not more than five 
thousand cubic metres of water on a public stream for the storage of water for primary purposes shall  in 
writing notify the catchment council, every other owner, lessee or occupier of riparian land which is 
contiguous to the proposed water storage works that—  
(a) he intends to construct the proposed water storage works;  and  
(b) such owner, lessee or occupier may, on payment of an agreed proportion of the cost of construction 
and maintenance of the proposed water storage works, participate in the benefit of them.  
(3) Any dispute concerning—  
(a) the quantity of water abstracted, used or stored or the method of abstracting, using or storing water for 
primary purposes in terms of subsection (1);  or  
(b) the cost referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (2) or the proportion of such cost to be paid by the 
respective owners, lessees or occupiers concerned;  
shall be determined by a catchment council.  
(4) Notwithstanding this section, no person shall construct in a public stream water storage works 
capable of storing more than five thousand cubic metres of water for primary purposes except in terms of 
a permit issued in terms of this Part.  
33 Power of catchment council to limit quantity of water abstracted for primary purposes  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a catchment council may, if it thinks it necessary 
in the public interest to ensure the equitable distribution and use of water, by notice in the Gazette—  


--- PAGE 18 ---

 
(a) a limit the quantity of water which may be abstracted for primary purposes by any person or class of 
persons within any area from any source of water;  
(b) specify the maximum number of livestock an individual owner is entitled to water for the primary 
purposes.  
(2) A person who abstracts water for primary purposes in contravention of a limitation imposed in 
terms of subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level six or to 
imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
34 Application for permit  
(1) No person shall abstract water for any purpose other than primary purposes except in terms of a 
permit.  
(2) An application for a permit shall be made in the prescribed form and lodged, subject to subsection 
(3), with the catchment council for the area concerned.  
(3) Any person who requires a permit to use water for mining purposes shall lodge with the mining 
commissioner of the mining district in which the permit is required an application for the permit.  
(4) A mining commissioner with whom an application has been lodged in terms of subsection (4) shall 
transmit the application, together with a report thereon by a Government mining engineer, to the appropriate 
catchment council.  
(5) On an application lodged in terms of this section, a catchment council may, subject to this Act, 
grant a permit for the use of water subject to such conditions, including conditions relating to the rate of 
abstraction of the water, as it may impose, or may refuse such application.  
(6) Before granting an application for a permit relating to water which is being beneficially used by 
another person, a catchment council shall require the applicant to pay to the person beneficially using the 
water concerned such compensation as may be agreed by the applicant and such person or failing such 
agreement, as may be fixed by the catchment council.  
(7) A catchment council may, if—  
(a) compensation is payable to a person deprived wholly or partly of the right to use water for agricultural 
or institutional purposes;  and  
(b) it considers that the deprivation will render the piece of land to which the right relates unsuitable for 
the purpose for which it is being used or is bona fide intended to be used immediately prior to the date 
of the application;  
direct the applicant to purchase the piece of land at such price as may be agreed or, failing such agreement, as may 
be fixed by the catchment council.  
(8) Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of a catchment council in terms of this section may 
appeal to the Administrative Court in terms of Part X.  
(9) The Minister may, in respect of ground water, exempt any area from any provisions of this section.  
35 Authority to sink boreholes for any purpose or wells for purposes other than primary purposes  
(1) The written authority of the catchment council to sink, alter or deepen  
(a) a borehole for any primary purposes shall be obtained;  
(b) a borehole or well for any purposes other than primary purposes shall be obtained before making an 
application for a permit in terms of subsection (1) of section thirty-four in respect of ground water.  
(2) Within thirty days of the completion of the sinking, altering or deepening of the borehole or well, 
the owner or occupier of the land on which the borehole or well has been sunk, altered or deepened shall 
notify the catchment council in the prescribed manner of the fact and furnish the council such particulars 
as may be prescribed, and, if ground water has been found, the catchment council shall, in the case where 
an application is made therefor, issue a permit to the owner or occupier in terms of section thirty-four.  
[Section substituted by section 26 of Act 14 of 2002]  
36 Period of validity of permit  
(1) Subject to this Act, a permit shall be valid for a period of twenty years or such shorter or longer 
period as a catchment council, with the approval of the Secretary, may fix.  
(2) Subject to section twenty-three, on the expiry of the period referred to in subsection (1), a permit 
may, upon application in the prescribed form, be renewed for such period as the catchment council may 
fix.  
(3) If, for a continuous period of three years, the holder of a permit —  
(a) fails to make use of the permit, the catchment council may cancel the permit;  


--- PAGE 19 ---

 
(b) makes partial use of the permit, the catchment council may amend the permit by reducing the quantity 
of water allocated under the permit.  
(4) Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of a catchment council in terms of this section may, 
within thirty days of the decision, appeal to the Administrative Court in terms of Part X.  
37 Permits to pass to new owner  
A permit shall, on the transfer of the piece of land to which it relates, pass to the new owner of the piece of land 
concerned.  
38 Permit not transferable except with consent of council  
Subject to subsection (1) of section forty-four, no person shall cede, sell or otherwise alienate a permit except 
with the consent of the catchment council concerned, granted after consultation with the Secretary.  
39 Minister may direct National Water Authority to apply for permit  
(1) Whenever he considers it desirable in the public interest to do so, the Minister may direct the 
National Water Authority to apply to a catchment council for a permit —  (a) to conserve or use water for 
any purpose whatsoever;  
(b) to construct any water works and to supply, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed with the 
Minister, water from such water works to any person requiring the water;  and  
(c) to acquire any water works or a right to the use of water which has been granted to any person by virtue 
of a permit in terms of this Act or any other enactment, whether or not such right is being beneficially 
used.  
(2) The catchment council may accede to an application in terms of subsection (1) and grant the permit 
applied for subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose or refuse such application.  
(3) Subject to subsection (5), the National Water Authority may—  
(a) for the purposes of operating, inspecting or maintaining any water works referred to in subsection (1), 
enter upon the premises of any person in order to inspect those premises or anything thereon in order 
to carry out work connected with any property of the National Water Authority;  
(b) take and use gravel, rock, sand, soil, stone, wood and other materials from, or drain, excavate or tunnel, 
any land.  
(4) Subject to subsection (5), the Minister may acquire any land capable of being irrigated from any 
water works referred to in subsection (1)and such other land as he may consider necessary to ensure sound 
and economic farming methods to be practised on the land capable of being so irrigated.  
(5) Parts III, V and VII of the Land Acquisition Act [Chapter 20:10] shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to 
the exercise by the National Water Authority of its powers in terms of this section.  
(6) Whenever a catchment council has granted to the National Water Authority in terms of this section 
the permit to acquire or construct any water works and the National Water Authority has exercised the right 
granted by the permit, the sole right to allocate water from the water works shall—  
  
(a) vest in the National Water Authority;  and  
 (b) not be subject to control by the catchment council;  
notwithstanding that such water may be passed down a public stream from the water works to the consumers of the 
water.  
(7) Notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary entered into before the date of commencement of 
this Act concerning the allocation of any water works acquired or constructed by the former Regional Water 
Authority in accordance with right granted in terms of any previous enactment, the Minister may, in 
consultation with the National Water Authority, authorize the reallocation of any such water in terms of 
this Act and fix a tariff of charges in respect of that water.  
(8) The Minister or, with the consent of the Minister, the National Water Authority, may—   
(a) 
cede to the Agricultural and Rural Development Authority;  or  
  
(b) authorize any person to exercise; any right granted in terms of 
this section on such conditions as he may fix.  
(9) Where a cession is made in terms of paragraph (a) of subsection (8)—  
(a) the permit issued in terms of subsection (2) shall be binding on the Agricultural and Rural Development 
Authority, in so far as is applicable;  and  
(b) subsection (6) shall apply, mutatis, mutandis in relation to the right as if the reference to the National 
Water Authority in that subsection were a reference to the Agricultural and Rural Development 
Authority.  
40 Construction of works necessary for enjoyment of rights to use water  


--- PAGE 20 ---

 
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person to whom a permit has been granted may abstract from the public 
stream, borehole or well concerned such quantity of water as he considers necessary for the construction of 
works required for the enjoyment of the right granted under the permit.  
(2) Water shall be abstracted in terms of subsection (1) subject to the rights granted to any other person 
in terms of this Act or any other enactment.  
41 Amendment of permits to abstract, control, divert, store or use water  
(1) Subject to subsection (5) of section fifty, any person to whom a permit  has been granted shall, if 
he wishes—  
(a) the quantity of water he is authorized to abstract, control, divert, store or use to be amended;  or  
(b) the point on the course of the public stream concerned from which water is abstracted, controlled, 
diverted or used to be amended;  or  
(c) to abstract, control, divert or use water at an additional point on the course of the public stream 
concerned;  or  
(d) the conditions on which the right to use water was granted to be amended;  
lodge with the catchment council an application in the prescribed form for such amendment.  
(2) The catchment council may, on an application lodged in terms of subsection (1), grant the 
application subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose, or refuse the application.  
42 Reporting of existing storage works, boreholes and wells  
(1) A catchment council may require the owner, lessee or occupier of any land to notify the catchment 
manager in writing, within such period as may be specified, of such particulars as the catchment manager 
may specify, in respect of any existing storage works, borehole or well on such land.  
(2) Any person who fails or refuses to comply with a requirement in terms of subsection (1) shall be 
guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not 
exceeding six months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
43 Records of amount of water abstracted to be maintained  
(1) A catchment council may require the holder of a permit issued in terms of this Part—  
(a) to provide and install a meter or other measuring device for measuring and recording the amount of 
water abstracted; and  
(b) to submit to the catchment council in the prescribed form at such intervals as the catchment council 
may require, returns indicating the amount of water abstracted.  
(2) Any officer or other person authorized by a catchment council may inspect any meter or other 
measuring device, take readings therefrom and seal such device in order to prevent interference with its 
working.  
(3) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not 
exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
44 Restrictions on cession of   right to use water, or sale or use of, water  
(1) Subject to subsection (2) of section thirty-two, thirty-nine and subsections (2) and (3) of section 
seventynine, no person other than—  
(a) the Minister shall cede a right to use water to any person;  or  
(b) the Minister, the National Water Authority or a local authority or a body corporate established directly 
by any enactment or by an Order in Council made in pursuance of the Rhodesia and Nyasaland Act, 
1963, of the United Kingdom shall sell to any person water for the use of which he holds a permit 
unless he or it is authorized by the Minister to do so;  or  
(c) the holder of a right to use water conferred by subsection (1) of section thirty-two or granted in terms 
of section thirty-four shall use water stored by virtue of such right unless authorized to do so by the 
holder and in terms of a right to the use of water conferred by or granted in terms of this Act.  
(2) A person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not 
exceeding level six or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
45 Change of course of public stream  
(1) Whenever a public stream which forms the boundary between two or more pieces of land changes 
its course the boundaries of such pieces of land shall not thereby be changed.  


--- PAGE 21 ---

 
(2) An owner of land may, after a change of course referred to in subsection (1), apply to the catchment 
council to fix—  
  
(a) on the changed course of the public stream concerned a point or points—  
 (i) to which he shall have a right of access;  and  
  
(ii) at which he may take the water;  
  
 and  
  
(b) the line along which the water of the public stream may be abstracted or diverted.  
(3) A catchment council may grant an application made in terms of subsection (2) subject to such 
conditions as it thinks fit to impose, or refuse the application.  
(4) Whenever a riparian owner has been adversely affected by a change of course referred to in 
subsection (1), he may apply to the catchment council for a permit to construct works necessary to restore 
the public stream concerned to its former course.  
(5) A catchment council may, on an application lodged in terms of subsection (4)—  
 (a) if it is satisfied that the applicant has been adversely affected by the change of course concerned and subject to 
any rights lawfully acquired in respect of the changed course of the public stream concerned, grant the application 
subject to such conditions, if any, relating to the nature of the works to be constructed and the time within which 
the construction shall be completed as it thinks fit to impose;  or  (b) refuse the application.  
(6) The Minister may, whenever he thinks it necessary in the public interest to do so, apply or authorize 
any other person in writing to apply to the catchment council for the right -  (a) to change the course of a 
public stream;  and  
 (b) to construct such works or to do such acts in and along the course of a public stream, including the bed and 
banks thereof, as may be necessary.  
(7) A catchment council may grant an application made in terms of subsection (6) subject to such 
conditions as it thinks fit to impose, or refuse the application.  
(8) A catchment council shall, in determining whether or not to grant an application in terms of 
subsection  
(5) or (7), take into account the extent to which existing permits may be affected by its decision.  
(9) A person to whom a right has been granted in terms of subsection (5) or (7) may—  
  
(a) exercise all or any of the powers conferred on an officer by subsection (1) of section nine;  and  
 (b) acquire, enter, lease or use any land:  
   Provided that he shall not enter any premises without the consent of the owner, lessee or occupier thereof;  and  
 (c) take and use gravel, rock, sand, soil, stone, wood and other materials from, or drain, excavate or tunnel, any 
land;  
to the extent that may be necessary or incidental to the exercise of the right.  
(10)Parts III, V and VIII of the Land Acquisition Act [Chapter 20:10] shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the 
exercise by a person referred to in subsection (9) of the powers referred to in that subsection.  
(11)Whenever the course of a public stream which forms the boundary between two or more pieces of land is 
changed in terms of a right granted in terms of this section, subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply, mutatis mutandis.  
46 Application for permit to conduct operations in public streams  
(1) In this section—  
“Mining Affairs Board” has the meaning given by the Mines and Minerals Act [Chapter 21:05]  
(2) Subject to subsection (5) and to subsections (4) to (11) of section forty-five, a person who wishes 
to conduct operations which will interfere with—  
(a) the banks, bed or course of a public stream;  or  
(b) any marshes, springs, swamps or vleis forming the source, or found along the course, of a public 
stream; shall apply to the catchment council for a permit to conduct such operations.  
(3) A catchment council may grant an application in terms of subsection (2) subject to such conditions 
as it thinks fit to impose, or refuse the application.  
(4) A catchment council shall, in determining whether or not to grant an application in terms of 
subsection  
(3), take into account the extent to which existing rights may be affected by its decision.  
(5) This section shall not apply to—  
(a) the construction of water works in terms of a right conferred by or granted in terms of this Act;  or  
(b) the construction, maintenance or repair of an aqueduct, bridge, culvert, road, crossing or hydrological 
station or ancillary works;  or  


--- PAGE 22 ---

 
(c) any mining or prospecting operations carried on in terms of the Mines and Minerals Act [Chapter 
21:05] if the Mining Affairs Board certifies to the catchment council that the operations will be carried 
on in such manner that there will be no interference with the quality or quantity of water;  or  
(d) the cultivation or use of wet land as defined in the Natural Resources Act [Chapter 20:13] or the banks 
of a public stream if the cultivation or use has been authorized in terms of any regulations made in 
terms of section 65 of that Act;  or  
(e) the abstraction of sand by a riparian owner from any portion of the bed of the public stream concerned 
lying within the boundaries of the riparian land of the riparian owner for the purpose of building 
operations within such boundaries;  or  
(f) any activities carried on by or on behalf of the State for the National Railways of Zimbabwe or a road 
authority as defined in the Roads Act [Chapter 13:12];  or  
(g) a person extracting, with the permission of the appropriate rural district council, sand within 
Communal Land for the purpose of building operations therein.  
(6) A person aggrieved by a decision of the Mining Affairs Board in terms of paragraph (c) of 
subsection (5) may appeal to the Administrative Court in terms of Part X against the decision.  
47 Consent of Minister to be obtained for water storage works of certain size  
(1) Subject to Part IX, no person shall apply for a permit to construct in a public stream water works 
capable of storing in excess of five million cubic metres of water or abstracting more than one hundred 
litres of water per second without first obtaining the consent in writing of the Minister.  
(2) On an application for the consent referred to in subsection (1), the Minister may, if he thinks it 
desirable in the public interest to do so, grant his consent subject to such conditions as he thinks fit to 
impose, or refuse the application.  
(3) If the Minister has imposed conditions in granting the consent referred to in subsection (1), the 
catchment council shall, in granting the permit to construct water storage works referred to in that 
subsection, make the conditions binding on the person to whom the permit is granted.  
(4) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not 
exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
48 Safeguarding interests of occupants of Communal Land  
(1) The Minister shall, in exercising the powers conferred on him by this Act, have due regard to the 
interests of occupants of Communal Land.  
(2) The Minister responsible for the administration of the Communal land Act [Chapter 20:04] may 
nominate any fit person to represent the interests of the occupants of any Communal land before the 
catchment council on the hearing of—  
(a) any matter affecting the water supply of the Communal Land;  or  
(b) any claim for the grant of a servitude in terms of Part VIII over any portion of Communal Land.  
49 Decisions of catchment council affecting water supply for primary purposes in Communal land  
Whenever an order or other decision of a catchment council in respect of an application for a permit to use 
water for an irrigation scheme or any other matter is likely, in the opinion of the catchment council, substantially to 
affect the supply of water for primary purposes of the occupants of any Communal Land, the order or other decision 
shall not take effect unless the approval of the Minister responsible for the administration of the Communal Land 
Act [Chapter 20:04], has first been obtained.  
50 Grant of final, provisional or temporary permits  
(1) A catchment council may grant a provisional permit or a temporary permit to use water for such 
period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the provisional permit or temporary permit.  
(2) A person who wishes the period for which a provisional permit or temporary permit was granted 
to him to be extended may lodge with the catchment council an application for such an extension.  
(3) On an application in terms of subsection (2), a catchment council may extend the period for which 
the provisional permit or temporary permit concerned was granted for such further period or periods as it 
thinks fit, or refuse to make such an extension.  
(4) On the expiry of the period for which a provisional permit was granted, the holder of the 
provisional permit shall, if he has not already done so, forthwith submit to the catchment council a report 
issued by the catchment manager certifying whether or not the conditions imposed on the grant of the 
provisional permit have been fulfilled.  
(5) If the catchment manager certifies that the conditions of the provisional permit have—  
(a) been fulfilled, the catchment council shall issue a final permit on such conditions as it may fix;  or  


--- PAGE 23 ---

 
(b) been partially fulfilled so as to permit partial use of the provisional permit concerned, the catchment  
council shall notify the holder of the provisional permit that he may lodge an application in terms of 
subsection (6), and of the consequences of his failure to do so;  or  
(c) not been fulfilled or partially fulfilled, the catchment council may record the provisional permit as 
having lapsed.  
(6) If the holder of a provisional permit referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (5)—  
 (a) within a period of ninety days of being notified by the catchment council in terms of that paragraph or such 
longer period as it may authorize, lodges with the catchment council an application for the extension of 
the period of his provisional permit or for a final permit to the extent of the partial use so certified, the 
catchment council   may—  
(i) 
extend the period of the provisional permit on such conditions as it thinks fit;  or  
(ii) 
issue a final permit to the extent of the partial use certified in terms of subsection (4);  or  
(iii) refuse to extend the period of the provisional permit or to issue a final permit and record the 
provisional permit as having lapsed.  
(7) If the holder of a provisional permit does not, within a period of ninety days of the expiry of the 
period fixed for the fulfilment of the conditions imposed on the grant of a provisional permit or such longer 
period as the catchment council may authorize in terms of subsection (3), submit to the catchment council 
the report referred to in subsection (4), the catchment council may record the provisional permit as having 
lapsed.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the catchment council may  
  
(a) on the application of the holder of a provisional permit, record the provisional permit as having lapsed;  
 (b) extend the period for which—  
(i) 
a provisional permit which has been recorded in terms of this section as having lapsed;  or  
(ii) 
a temporary permit which has expired;  
  was granted as if such provisional right or temporary right had not been so recorded or had not expired, as the case 
may be.  
51 Certain permits to enjoy preference over other rights to use water  
(1) No permits granted by a catchment council, other than permits for the use of water granted to a 
local authority for primary purposes, shall have the effect of    depriving—  (a) persons of the use of water 
for primary purposes;  or  
 (b) an owner of land on which there is a permanent pool of the use for primary purposes of water in the permanent 
pool.  
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (b) of subsection (1)—  
“permanent pool” means a pool—  
(a) in which water is normally present;  and  
(b) which is in a portion of a public stream which does not form a boundary between two or more 
pieces of land;  
  
but does not include a pool from which water flows visibly on to, or into which water flows visibly from, 
some other piece of land otherwise than as a direct result of rainfall.  
52 Disposal of water after use  
(1) Subject to the conditions imposed on the grant of a permit for the use of the water concerned and 
to subsection (2), water which has been used for electrical purposes, mining purposes or miscellaneous 
purposes shall be allowed to return to the bed of the public stream from which it was abstracted at the 
nearest convenient point.  
(2) A person who has abstracted water for any of the purposes referred to in subsection (1) over a 
watershed or from a borehole or well shall return any water which he has used or which is surplus to his 
requirements in terms of a right conferred by or granted in terms of this Act -  (a) to the public stream from 
which it was abstracted;  or  
  
(b) to a public stream, specified by the catchment council at a point fixed by the catchment council.  
(3) Part VI shall apply to water returned to a public stream in terms of this section.  
(4) A person who wishes to use any water during the course of its return to a public stream in terms of 
this section may lodge with the catchment council an application for a permit so to use the water.  
(5) On an application in terms of subsection (4), the catchment council may grant the application 
subject to such conditions as it may impose, or refuse the application.  
53 Allocation or apportionment of rights to use water on consolidation or subdivision of land  


--- PAGE 24 ---

 
(1) Whenever a piece of land in respect of which a permit has been granted is to be consolidated with 
another piece of land or subdivided, the owner of the first-mentioned piece of land shall, prior to the 
consolidation, lodge with the catchment council an application for the allocation, apportionment or revision 
of the permit.  
(2) On an application in terms of subsection (1), the catchment council may grant the application and 
make an allocation, apportionment or revision subject to such conditions as it may impose, or refuse the 
application.  
(3) The catchment council may, whenever—  
(a) there is a consolidation or subdivision of land to which, prior to the consolidation or subdivision, a 
permit existed;  and  
(b) no application is lodged in terms of subsection (1) for the allocation or apportionment of the right 
referred to in paragraph (a);  
of its own motion or on the application of an interested party allocate or apportion the right referred to in paragraph 
(a).  
(4) In considering an application lodged in terms of subsection (1) or an allocation or apportionment 
in terms of subsection (3), the catchment council shall have due regard to—  
(a) the economic aspects of the application and the soil conditions of the land concerned;  and  
(b) the need to achieve, as far as possible, an equitable distribution of the available water resources;  and  
(c) any other matter which appears to the catchment council to be relevant; and may revise any permit for 
the use of the water concerned.  
54 Rights to use water when volume thereof insufficient to satisfy demand  
Whenever the volume of water in any river system or part thereof for the use of which permits have been granted 
proves insufficient to satisfy all the permits, the catchment council shall, subject to section forty-one, revise, 
reallocate or reapportion the permits upon such conditions and in such manner as will ensure the equitable 
distribution and use of the available water.  
55 Responsibility for maintenance of water works  
(1) The holder of any permit shall maintain in efficient repair all water works connected with the 
permit.  
(2) If a permit—  
(a) is relinquished by the holder thereof;  or  
(b) is cancelled by the catchment council;  or  
(c) lapses;  
the owner of the land on which any water works connected with the permit exist shall maintain such water works in 
efficient repair, unless authorized in writing by the catchment council to breach or demolish them.  
(3) Any person who—  
(a) contravenes subsection (1);  or  
(b) breaches or demolishes any water works connected with a permit to use water without the authority 
referred to in  subsection (2);  
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not 
exceeding six months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the breaching or demolishing of any water 
works in pursuance of an order or variation thereof—  
(a) which is referred to in paragraph (c) of subsection (6) of section 28 of the Natural Resources Act 
[Chapter 20:13];  and  
(b) to which the Secretary has consented.  
56 Reservation of areas likely to be required for dam basins or dam sites  
(1) Subject to subsection (3) of section eighteen, the Minister may, in consultation with the catchment 
council concerned, whenever he considers it necessary in the public interest to do so, by notice in the 
Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area concerned, reserve any area comprising a potential dam 
basin or a potential dam site or both against any one or more of the following-  
(a) subdivision in terms of the Regional, Town and Country Planning Act [Chapter 29:12];   
(b) the construction of permanent improvements therein or thereon;   
(c) the carrying on of any activity which may have the effect of—   (i) enhancing the value of any land in 
such area;  or  
  
(ii) interfering with—  


--- PAGE 25 ---

 
A. such dam basin or dam site or both;  
B. any water works that may be constructed in the future; in such area:  
   Provided that the Minister shall not reserve any area against the carrying on of any prospecting or mining activity 
except with the consent of the Minister responsible for the administration of the Mines and 
Minerals Act [Chapter 21:05].  
(2) A notice referred to in subsection (1) shall specify—  
(a) the area reserved in terms of that subsection;  and  
(b) the acts against the doing of which the area referred to in paragraph (a) is reserved.  
(3) The Minister shall by registered letter give notice of a reservation in terms of subsection (1) to 
every owner, lessee or occupier of land in the area in respect of which the reservation is made.  
(4) Publication in the Gazette of a notice referred to in subsection (1) shall have the effect of 
prohibiting the doing of the acts specified in such notice on the land in the area reserved in terms of that 
subsection:  
Provided that the Minister may, on such conditions as he may impose, permit such use of the land as he sees 
fit.  
(5) The Minister shall, subject to subsection (6), pay compensation to any person who is injuriously 
affected by a reservation made in terms of subsection (1).  
(6) Any person who wishes to claim compensation payable in terms of subsection (5) shall, within 
sixty days from the date of publication of the notice referred to in subsection (1) or such longer period as 
the Minister may, on good cause shown allow, submit a claim in writing to the Minister specifying in detail 
the nature of the loss or damage caused to him by the reservation concerned.  
(7) If the claimant for compensation and the Minister cannot agree on the right to compensation or the 
amount of compensation payable in terms of subsection (5), either of them may refer the matter to the 
Administrative Court and Parts V and VIII of the Land Acquisition Act [Chapter 20:10] shall apply, mutatis 
mutandis, in respect of such matter.  
(8) The Minister may permit such use of the land in the area reserved in terms of subsection (1) as he 
considers appropriate.  
(9) The Minister shall cause—  
(a) the area reserved in terms of subsection (1) to be surveyed and beaconed by a land surveyor as defined 
in the Land Survey Act [Chapter 20:12];  and  
(b) survey diagrams of the area referred to in paragraph (a) to be prepared.  
(10)As soon as possible after survey diagrams have been prepared in terms of subsection (9), the 
Minister shall lodge—  
  
(a) two copies thereof with the Registrar of Deeds;  and  
 (b) one copy thereof with the Director of Physical Planning.  
(11)Subject to subsection (14), the Registrar of Deeds shall, on the lodging with him of survey diagrams 
in terms of subsection (10), note the reservation concerned on the title deeds of the pieces of land affected 
thereby and in the appropriate registers.   
(12)A note made in terms of subsection (11) shall not prevent the transfer of the land concerned.  
(13)The Minister, in consultation with the catchment council concerned may, at any time, by notice in 
the Gazette—  
(a) modify a reservation made in terms of subsection (1) and this section shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to 
such modification;  or  
(b) withdraw a reservation made in terms of subsection (1) and cause the Registrar of Deeds and the 
Director of Physical Planning to be informed of the withdrawal.  
(14)The Registrar of Deeds shall, on the lodging with him of survey diagrams in terms of subsection 
(10) relating to a modified reservation or on being informed in terms of subsection (13) of the withdrawal 
of a reservation made in terms of subsection (1), cause the note made in terms of subsection (11) to be 
altered or cancelled accordingly.  
(15)If in terms of subsection (13) the Minister modifies or withdraws a reservation made in terms of 
subsection (1), the Minister shall reassess any compensation payable to any person in terms of subsection 
(5) or (8) and subsections (5) to (8) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to such reassessment.  
(16)If a person does on any land in an area reserved in terms of subsection (1) any act the doing of 
which is prohibited in terms of subsection (4), the Minister may by notice in writing, direct the person to 
restore the land, at his own expense within such period as is specified in the notice, to the condition in 
which it was immediately before the doing of the act.  


--- PAGE 26 ---

 
(17)If a person against whom a direction has been made in terms of subsection (16) fails to comply 
with the direction within the period specified in the notice concerned, the Minister may cause to be carried 
out such work as may be necessary to restore the land concerned to the condition in which it was 
immediately before the doing of the act concerned and recover from the person by action in a court of 
competent jurisdiction the cost of the work.  
(18)Section thirty-nine shall apply to any land which is acquired for the construction of any water 
works while the area within which the land is situated is reserved in terms of subsection (1).  
(19)If the powers conferred by this section are exercised at the request of the National Water Authority 
or the Agricultural and Rural Development Authority, any compensation payable in terms of or costs 
incurred in complying with this section shall, subject to any right of recovery in terms of subsection (17), 
be paid from the funds of the National Water Authority or the Agricultural and Rural Development 
Authority, as the case may be.  
(20)Any person who—  
(a) on any land in an area reserved in terms of subsection (1), does anything which is prohibited in terms 
of subsection (4);  or  
(b) fails to comply with a direction in terms of subsection (16);  
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level six or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 
six months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection substituted by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
57 Reservation of water  
(1) Subject to subsection (4) of section eighteen and to this section, the Minister may, by notice in the 
Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area concerned—  
(a) reserve for an indefinite period for future use any specified quantity of water from, or a portion of, the 
potential yield or total annual runoff of any catchment area;  or  
(b) amend the quantity or portion reserved for future use in terms of paragraph (a) or withdraw the 
reservation subject to such conditions as the Minister may specify in such notice:  
   Provided that such reservation or amendment shall take into account any existing outline plans or permits.   
(2) A permit which would have the effect of reducing the specified quantity of water from, or portion 
of, the potential yield or total annual runoff reserved for future use in terms of subsection (1) shall not be 
granted by a catchment council to any person other than the Minister:  
Provided that the Minister may authorize the catchment council to grant temporary permits for the use of the 
water so reserved on such conditions as he may specify.  
(3) The Minister shall publish a notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area 
concerned stating his intention to make a reservation or amendment in terms of subsection (1) and the 
purpose for which the reservation or amendment is intended to be made.  
(4) Any interested person may, within a period of thirty days from the date of publication of a notice 
in terms of subsection (3), lodge with the Secretary objections or representations in writing, together with 
a full statement of the grounds for, and technical data and evidence supporting, the objections or 
representations.   
(5) If no objections or representations referred to in subsection (4) have been lodged within the period 
referred to in that subsection, the Minister may act in terms of subsection (1).  
(6) If objections or representations referred to in subsection (4) have been lodged within the period 
referred to in that subsection, the Minister shall, after considering the objections or representations —  (a) 
act or decline to act, as the case may be, in terms of subsection (1);  or  
 (b) refer the objections or representations to the catchment council or a person appointed in writing by the Minister 
for investigation and recommendation.  
(7) The catchment council or a person appointed in terms of paragraph (b) of subsection (6) shall, on 
receipt of the objections or representations concerned, investigate them and make a recommendation to the 
Minister.  
(8) The Minister shall pay due regard to any recommendation made in terms of subsection (7) before 
acting in terms of subsection (1).  
(9) If the Minister has published a notice in terms of subsection (3), no application for a right to use 
water lodged with the catchment council concerned after the date of such publication, which application 
would, if it were granted, have the effect of reducing the quantity or portion of water intended to be reserved, 
shall be considered by the catchment council until the Minister has acted or declined to act in terms of 
subsection (1).  
58 Water development restriction areas  


--- PAGE 27 ---

 
(1) Subject to this section, if the Minister, on the recommendation of the National Water Authority 
and in consultation with the catchment council concerned, is of the opinion that the use of water in any 
catchment area is approaching the limit of the potential of the catchment area and that it is necessary or 
desirable in the public interest to make a declaration in terms of this section, he may,  by notice in the 
Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area concerned declare the area to be a water development 
restriction area.  
(2) The Minister may at any time, by notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area 
concerned, amend the boundaries of a water development restriction area, and this section shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis, to any such amendment.  
(3) No permit shall be granted by a catchment council in a water development restriction area: 
Provided that—  
(i) the Minister may authorize a catchment council to grant such permits to develop water resources in a 
water development restriction area as he may specify;  
(ii) this subsection shall not apply to application referred to in subsection (1) of section thirty-nine .  
(4) The Minister shall publish a notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area 
concerned stating his intention to declare or to amend the boundaries of the water development restriction 
area and the purpose for which such declaration or amendment is intended to be made.  
(5) Any interested person may, within a period of thirty days from the date of publication of a notice 
in terms of subsection (4), lodge with the Secretary objections or representations, together with a full 
statement of the grounds for, and technical data and evidence supporting, the objections or representations.  
(6) If no objections or representations referred to in subsection (5) have been lodged within the period 
referred to in that subsection, the Minister may act in terms of subsection (1).  
(7) If objections or representations referred to in subsection (5) have been lodged within the period 
referred to in that subsection, the Minister shall, after considering the objections or representations -  (a) 
act or decline to act, as the case may be, in terms of subsection (1); or  
 (b) refer the objections or representations to the catchment council, authority or person appointed in writing by the 
Minister for investigation and recommendation.  
(8) A catchment council or the authority or person in terms of paragraph (b) of subsection (6) shall, 
on receipt of the objections or representations concerned, investigate them and make recommendations to 
the Minister.  
(9) The Minister shall pay due regard to any recommendation made in terms of subsection (8) before 
acting in terms of subsection (1).  
(10)If the Minister has published a notice in terms of subsection (4), no application for a permit in the 
intended water development restriction area lodged with the catchment council after the date of the notice 
shall be considered by the catchment council concerned until the Minister has acted or decided not to act 
in terms of subsection (1).  
59 Investigation of use of water by National Water Authority The National Water Authority—  
(a) shall, when required to do so by the Minister, investigate and report to him on the abstraction, 
appropriation, control, diversion or use  of water in any catchment area;  
(b) may, at its own instance, investigate the abstraction, appropriation, control, diversion or use of water 
in any area and thereafter direct the catchment council to issue, cancel or revise any permit issued in 
terms of this Part in the area concerned.  
60 Conferring of powers of catchment councils on urban councils  
The Minister may, after consultation with the Minister responsible for local government and the urban council 
concerned, and after considering the financial resources available to that council—  
(a) subject to such conditions as he thinks fit to impose, confer confer on the urban council any of the 
powers of a catchment council in terms of this Part;  and  
(b) amend or withdraw the powers conferred in terms of paragraph (a).   
PART V  
WATER SHORTAGE AREAS  
61 Declaration of water shortage areas  
(1) If the Minister, acting on the recommendation of the National Water Authority and in consultation 
with the catchment council concerned, is of the opinion that—  
(a) the flow of water in any public stream has at any time ceased or if the flow of water or the level of 
water in the storage works has fallen or is likely to fall below the level of the usual flow or acceptable 
level of storage works in the public stream; or  


--- PAGE 28 ---

 
(b) it appears that the abstraction of water from boreholes and wells in any area is likely to diminish unduly 
the ground water resources in the area or affect adversely the flow of any surface water in any public 
stream;    
he may, by notice in the Gazette, declare any area specified in the notice to be a water shortage area for such period, 
not exceeding twelve months, as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) The Minister may, in consultation with the catchment council concerned, by notice in the Gazette, 
cancel a declaration made in terms of subsection (1).  
62 Powers of catchment council in respect of water shortage areas  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a catchment council may, in respect of a water 
shortage area within its area—  
(a) suspend or amend any permits;  or  
(b) make orders in relation to the abstraction, appropriation, control, diversion or use of any water;  or  
(c) upon an order of the Administrative Court on application by a catchment council, authorize the 
Minister or any other person to enter on any land for the purpose of—  
(i) 
abstracting water from any storage works, borehole, well or mine on the land;  
(ii) 
sinking boreholes and wells on the land and abstracting water therefrom and conserving, 
diverting or using such water;  
  
 for such purposes and in such quantities as the catchment council may authorize, and may make all such 
other orders as may be necessary in relation to subparagraph (i) and (ii);  or   (d) determine the priority in the use 
of water in the water shortage area.  
(2) Any action taken or order made in terms of subsection (1) shall lapse—  
(a) after such period as the catchment council may determine;  or  
(b) after the expiry of the period for which the area was declared a water shortage area;  or  
(c) on the cancellation of the declaration of the water shortage area concerned;  whichever is the earliest.  
(3) Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of a catchment council in terms of this section may 
appeal to the Administrative Court in terms of Part X.  
63 Sinking, deepening or altering of boreholes and wells in water shortage areas restricted  
(1) No person shall, in a water shortage area, commence to sink, deepen or alter a borehole or well for 
any purpose otherwise than in accordance with a permit issued by the catchment council, and the provisions 
of Part IV relating to boreholes and wells shall apply, mutatis mutandis.  
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not 
exceeding level six or to imprisonment not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
64 Maximum volume and rate of abstraction of water in water shortage areas  
(1) Subject to section sixty-three and on the recommendation of the National Water Authority, a 
catchment council may, by notice in the Gazette and in a newspaper circulating in the area concerned, fix 
a maximum volume of water which may be abstracted from any public stream or storage works and the 
maximum rate per month at which water may be abstracted from any borehole or well in a water shortage 
area.  
(2) The rate or volume referred to in subsection (1) may be fixed in relation to the area of land owned 
by any person in the water shortage area concerned or to any other circumstance which the catchment 
council considers relevant to the fixing of such rate or volume.  
(3) Subject to subsection (11), no person shall, after the publication of a notice referred to in subsection 
(1), in any month abstract water from any public stream, storage works, borehole or well in the water 
shortage area concerned at a rate exceeding the maximum rate fixed in terms of subsection (1).  
(4) A catchment council may cause to be investigated the use being made of water in a water shortage 
area, and may, after having given the owner or occupier of land on which the public stream, water works, 
borehole or well is located not less than fourteen days’ notice of its intention to do so, amend the conditions 
of, or suspend, any permit relating to any such water.  
(5) Any person who—  
(a) abstracts or desires to abstract water within a water shortage area for the purpose of his occupation or 
trade;  or  
(b) has carried out water conservation measures or works, the nature and extent of which are approved by 
the catchment council and which are likely to result in an improvement in the water resources in a 
water shortage area;  


--- PAGE 29 ---

 
may apply to the catchment council for a permit to abstract water within the water shortage area at a rate higher than 
the maximum rate fixed in terms of subsection (1).  
(6) A local authority may, whether the area under the jurisdiction of the local authority is within or 
outside a water shortage area, apply to the catchment council concerned for a permit to abstract water within 
a water shortage area at a rate higher than the maximum rate fixed in terms of subsection (1).  
(7) The catchment council may, on an application in terms of subsection (5) or (6)—  
 (a) issue a permit authorizing the abstraction of water at a rate higher than the maximum rate fixed in terms of 
subsection (1), subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose;  or  (b) refuse the application.  
(8) Any person to whom a permit has been issued to sink, deepen or alter a borehole or well in a water 
shortage area may, in the course of sinking, deepening or altering, abstract ground water at a rate higher 
than the maximum rate fixed in terms of subsection (1).  
(9) Any person who is aggrieved by—  
(a) the maximum rate of abstraction of water fixed in terms of subsection (1) may, within a period of thirty 
days from the date of publication of the notice referred to in that subsection;  or  
(b) any decision of a catchment council in terms of subsection (7) may, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of such decision;  
appeal to the Administrative Court in terms of Part X.  
(10)On an appeal in terms of subsection (9) —  
(a) relating to the maximum rate of abstraction of water fixed in terms of subsection (1), the Administrative 
Court may direct the catchment council to amend the rate or may confirm it;  or  
(b) relating to any decision of the catchment council in terms of subsection (7), the Administrative Court 
may direct the catchment council—  
(i) 
to issue or reissue the permit applied for, subject to such conditions as the Administrative 
Court may specify in such direction;  or  
(ii) 
to refuse the application concerned.  
(11)Any person who contravenes subsection (3) shall be guilty of an offence and liable a fine not 
exceeding level seven or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and 
such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
65 Measuring and recording of water abstracted in water shortage areas  
(1) A catchment council may, by notice in writing served on the person concerned, require any person 
who is abstracting water in a water shortage area for any purpose—  
(a) to provide and install a meter or other measuring device for measuring and recording the amount of 
water abstracted;  and  
(b) to submit at such intervals as may be specified in the notice and in the prescribed manner, returns of 
the water so abstracted.  
(2) An officer or any person authorized by the catchment council may read and inspect any meter or 
other measuring device installed in terms of subsection (1) and seal such device in order to prevent 
interference with its working.  
(3) Any person who fails to comply with a requirement in terms of subsection (1) shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six 
months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
66 Minister may authorize delegation of powers under this Part to local authorities  
The Minister may, after consultation with the local authority concerned and the Minister responsible for local 
government and after considering the financial resources available to such local authority, by notice in the Gazette—  
(a) authorize the delegation of any of the powers conferred on a catchment council by this Part to a local 
authority subject to such conditions as he thinks fit to impose;  and  
(b) amend or withdraw the powers delegated to a local authority in terms of paragraph (a).  
PART VI  
WATER QUALITY CONTROL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
67 Water resource management to be consistent with environmental approaches  
Without in any way limiting the generality paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of section six, in considering, 
formulating and implementing any proposal for the use, management or exploitation of water resources, due 
consideration shall be given to—  


--- PAGE 30 ---

 
(a) the protection, conservation and sustenance of the environment;  and  
(b) the right of access by members of the public to places of leisure or natural beauty related to water or 
water bodies.  
68 - 71 ….  
[Sections 68 – 71 repealed by section 142 of Act 13 of 2002]  
PART VII  
SERVITUDES IN RESPECT OF WATER  
72 Interpretation in Part VII  
In this Part—  
“interested party” means every owner of, and every holder of a real right in or lease of, land within the area on 
or over which a servitude is claimed in terms of section seventy-four;  
“permanent servitude” means a servitude other than a temporary servitude;  
“real right” means a real right registered in terms of the Deeds Registries Act [Chapter 20:15] or the Mines and 
Minerals Act [Chapter 21:05];  
“servitude” means a servitude of abutment, a servitude of passage, a servitude of purification or a servitude of 
storage;  
“servitude of abutment” means the right to occupy and use by means of water works, and the necessary 
appurtenances and structures, the banks or bed of a public stream or land adjacent thereto or any other land 
belonging to another and includes the right of access to and over the area subject to such right of occupation 
and use, after giving such notice as is reasonable in the circumstances to the occupier thereof, for the 
purpose of constructing, inspecting, maintaining and operating the water works and the necessary 
appurtenances and structures concerned or for any other purpose necessary for the effective enjoyment of 
the rights referred to in this definition;  
“servitude of passage” means the right to occupy and use so much land belonging to another as may be 
necessary for or incidental or the passage of water and includes the right—  
(a) to construct such water works as may be necessary for such passage on such land and over, under or alongside 
other water works or to enlarge and extend existing water works;  and  
(b) of access to and over the area subject to such right of occupation and use, after giving such notice as is 
reasonable in the circumstances to the occupier thereof, for the purpose of constructing, inspecting, maintaining 
and operating water works referred to in paragraph (a) or for any other purpose necessary for the effective 
enjoyment of the rights referred to in this definition;  
“servitude of purification” means the right to occupy and use so much land belonging to another as may be 
necessary for or incidental to the filtration and purification of water and processes incidental thereto and 
includes the right—  
(a) to construct such water works as may be necessary for such filtration and purification;  and  
(b) of access to and over the area subject to such right or occupation and use, after giving such notice as is 
reasonable in the circumstances to the occupier thereof for the purpose of constructing, inspecting, 
maintaining and operating water works referred to in paragraph (a) or for any other purpose necessary 
for the effective enjoyment of the rights referred to in this definition;  
“servitude of storage” means the right to occupy and use land belonging to another by inundating it with water 
by means of water storage works, together with such land—  
(a) contiguous to the land so inundated as may be required to be occupied and used by the holder of the servitude 
of storage for the purpose of preventing the pollution of the water stored by or in the water storage works;  and  
(b) adjacent to or near the land so inundated as may be required to be occupied and used for the purpose of passage, 
after giving such notice as is reasonable in the circumstances to the occupier thereof, for the purpose of 
cleansing and maintaining the water storage works or for any other  
purpose necessary for the effective enjoyment of the rights referred to in this definition;  
“temporary servitude” means a servitude with a duration of—  
(a) a fixed number of years;  or  
(b) the period for which it is used for the purpose for which it is granted, with or without further specification of 
such duration.  
73 
Acquisition of servitudes otherwise than in terms of Part VIII  
Nothing in this Part shall be construed as preventing any person from acquiring in accordance with any other 
law a servitude required in connection with any water works.  
74 
Certain persons may claim servitudes and enter on land  


--- PAGE 31 ---

 
(1) Subject to this Part, any person—  
(a) who holds a permit;  or  
(b) who is entitled to control or supervise the use of any water;  or  
(c) to whom the Minister, the National Water Authority or the Agricultural and Rural Development 
Authority has agreed to supply water from any water works acquired or constructed or to be acquired 
and constructed by the Minister, the National Water Authority or the Agricultural and Rural  
Development Authority;  
may, in terms of section seventy-five, claim a permanent or temporary servitude.  
(2) Any person who wishes to claim a permanent or temporary servitude in terms section seventy-five 
may, after giving such notice as is reasonable in the circumstances to the occupier of the land concerned, 
enter upon the premises, other than a dwelling-house thereon, for the purpose of obtaining the information 
required for compliance with that section.  
75 
Method of claiming servitudes  
(1) Subject to this Part, a servitude shall be claimed by serving on every interested party notice in 
writing—   
(a) requesting the servitude, which request shall specify—  
(i) 
the locality and nature of any water works which it is proposed to construct;  or  
(ii) 
the line of passage along which water is to be conducted or the locality in which water is to 
be stored or both such line and such locality;  and  
(iii) the duration of the proposed servitude;  and  
(iv) the quantity of gravel, rock, sand, soil, stone or wood, if any, required from the land 
concerned for the purpose of constructing water works or works incidental thereto;  and  
(v) 
that it is intended to register the proposed servitude against the title deeds of the land 
concerned;  and  
(vi) that any agreement to such claim is required to be in writing;  
 (b) inviting him, if he wishes to seek compensation in respect of any loss or deprivation of rights likely to result 
from the grant of the proposed servitude, to submit to the claimant, within a period of sixty days from the 
date of service of the notice or such longer period as a president of the Administrative Court may for good 
and sufficient reason allow, a statement in writing specifying in detail the nature of the loss or deprivation 
of rights likely to be caused to the interested party as a result of the grant.  
(2) If an interested party referred to in subsection (1)—  
  
(a) does not, within a period of sixty days from the date of service of the notice referred to in that 
subsection or such longer period as a president of the Administrative Court may for good and sufficient 
reason have allowed—  
(i) 
agree in writing to the request referred to in paragraph (a) of that subsection for the 
registration of the proposed servitude against the title deeds of the land concerned;  or  
(ii) 
agree in writing with the claimant on the right to compensation, if any, or the amount of 
compensation payable by the claimant or both, as the case may be;  
 or  
 (b) lacks full legal capacity to agree to the request referred to in paragraph (a) of that subsection; the claimant shall 
lodge with the Registrar his claim or the issue of compensation or both his claim and the issue of compensation.  
76 
Rights, privileges and obligations of interested parties at hearings of claims or issues of 
compensation  
.An interested party shall—  
(a) have the right to appear as a party before the Administrative Court on the hearing of a claim or an issue 
of compensation or both;  and  
(b) if he appears in terms of paragraph (a)—  
(i) 
have all the privileges belonging to;  and  
(ii) be subject to all the obligations which are or may be imposed on a party to proceedings before 
the Administrative Court.  
77 
Powers of Administrative Court in regard to claims or issues of compensation  
(1) Subject to this section, the Administrative Court may, on a claim lodged in terms of subsection (2) 
of section seventy-five—  
(a) grant the servitude claimed, with or without modifications and subject to such conditions as it thinks 
fit;  or  
(b) dismiss the claim on the ground that—  
(i) 
the servitude claimed does not fall within this Part;  or  


--- PAGE 32 ---

 
(ii) 
the object for which the servitude is claimed—   
A. could better be attained by other 
means;  or  
  
B. is not of sufficient agricultural or other utility to justify the acquisition of the proposed 
servitude;  
  
 or  
(iii) the claim is not made in good faith;  or  
(iv) the water works concerned are likely to cause more loss or damage or interference with 
development in the area concerned than would be justified by the benefits that would be 
derived therefrom;  
  and shall dismiss the claim if, in the case of a servitude referred to in section 11 of the Communal Land Act 
[Chapter 20:04], the Minister responsible for the administration of that Act has not consented to the 
granting of the servitude claimed or a condition fixed by that Minister in giving his consent cannot be 
made binding on the claimant.  
(2) Subject to this section, the Administrative Court may, on an issue of compensation lodged in terms 
of subsection (2) of section seventy-five, award or refuse to award compensation to the interested party 
concerned in respect of any loss or deprivation of rights likely to result from the grant of the proposed 
servitude.  
(3) Whenever any diagram showing the land affected by, and the situation thereon of, the servitude 
claimed is sought to be adduced or received in evidence at the hearing of a claim or issue of compensation 
lodged in terms of subsection (2) of section seventy-five or of both the claim and the issue, the diagram 
shall not be admissible in evidence before the Administrative Court unless it has been prepared in 
accordance with the Land Survey Act [Chapter 20:12].  
(4) Compensation awarded by the Administrative Court in terms of subsection (2) in respect of a 
proposed—  
(a) temporary servitude shall not exceed an annual sum equal to the amount by which the rental value of 
the land affected by the temporary servitude is diminished;  or  
(b) permanent servitude shall not exceed a sum equal to the amount by which the market value of the land 
affected by the servitude is diminished;  
together with an amount representing compensation for any expense or loss which may reasonably be incurred or 
suffered directly as a result of the grant of the temporary servitude or permanent servitude, as the case may be.  
(5) In paragraph (b) of subsection (4)—  
“market-value” means the market value of the land affected by the proposed servitude immediately prior to the 
service of the appropriate notice referred to in subsection (1) of section seventy-five, which value shall be 
taken to be the amount which the land would have realized if sold on the open market by a willing seller 
to a willing buyer, regard being had, when appropriate, to the nature of the land, its location and quality 
and any other fact which may, in the circumstances, be relevant.  
78 
Rights of owners of land subject to servitudes of passage  
(1) The owner of land subject to a servitude of passage may pass along the water works concerned any 
water to which he is entitled on—  
(a) payment of such proportion of the cost of constructing, enlarging, maintaining or 
repairing the water works;  and  
(b) such other conditions; as may be agreed or, failing agreement, as may be fixed by the 
Administrative Court: Provided that, if the servitude of passage has been acquired 
by—  
(a) the State or a local authority;  or  
(b) any statutory body—  
(i) 
established or re-established directly by or under any enactment;  and  
(ii) 
empowered or required by the enactment referred to in subparagraph (i) to acquire the 
servitude of passage;  
the owner shall not be entitled so to participate in the benefit of the water works.  
(2) A person who in terms of this Part constructs water works for the passage of water, which water 
works—  
(a) prevent any owner of land from passing freely over or on to his land;  or  
(b) obstruct the free circulation of water in the drainage or irrigation of any land or interfere with any 
mining operations thereon;  
shall construct, maintain and repair—  


--- PAGE 33 ---

 
(i) such bridges and other works as will make it convenient and safe to pass over or on to the land referred 
to in paragraph (a);  or  
(ii) such aqueducts, culverts and other works as are necessary to secure the free circulation of water 
referred to in paragraph (b) or prevent interference with the mining referred to in that paragraph;  
unless he is exempted from the duty to do so by agreement or otherwise.  
(3) In exercising a servitude of passage across a road, the holder of the servitude of passage shall, after 
having obtained the consent of the road authority concerned, construct, maintain and repair such works as 
will prevent inconvenience or danger to members of the public using the road in accordance with the 
instructions of the Secretary.  
(4) In subsection (3)—  
“road”and “road authority” have the respective meanings given by section 3 of the Roads Act [Chapter 13:12].  
79 
Rights of owners of land subject to servitudes of storage  
(1) Subject to any agreement or award by which the servitude concerned was acquired, a servitude of 
storage shall not deprive the owner, lessee or occupier of the land subject to the servitude of the use of any 
part of the land, whether submerged or unsubmerged:  
Provided that such use is not detrimental to the enjoyment of the servitude of storage   
(2) The holder of a servitude of storage shall, before commencing the construction of the water storage 
works concerned, notify the owner of the land subject to the servitude of storage in writing of—   
(a) 
his intention to construct the water storage works;  and   
(b) the provisions of subsection (3).  
(3) The owner of land subject to a servitude of storage may, before the construction of the water 
storage works concerned is commenced and on—  
(a) payment to the holder of the servitude of storage of such share of the costs of constructing, enlarging, 
maintaining or repairing the water storage works;  and  
(b) fulfilment of such conditions, other than the payment referred to in paragraph (a);  
as may be agreed or, failing agreement, as may be fixed by the Administrative Court, participate in the benefit of 
the water storage works in proportion to the share of the cost:  
Provided that, if the servitude of storage has been acquired by—  
(a) the State or a local authority;  or  
(b) any statutory body—  
(i) 
established or re-established directly by or under an enactment, including;  and  
(ii) 
empowered or required by the enactment referred to in subparagraph (i) to acquire the 
servitude of storage;  
the owner shall not be entitled so to participate in the benefit of such water storage works.  
80 
Rights included in servitudes  
(1) Every servitude shall include a right to take gravel, rock, sand, soil, stone or wood from the land 
subject to the servitude for the purpose of maintaining or repairing any water works thereon on payment to 
the owner of such land of such compensation as may be agreed or, failing agreement, as may be fixed by 
the Administrative Court:  
Provided that no gravel, rock, sand, soil, stone or wood shall be taken from -  
(a) within a distance of five hundred metres of any afforested or cultivated lands, premises or other 
structures, mining works or quarries;  or  
(b) forest land as defined in the Forest Act [Chapter 19:05];  
without the permission of the owner thereof.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), the Administrative Court  
 (a) may, if it considers that the permission of the owner concerned is being unreasonably withheld, authorize the 
taking of gravel, rock, sand, soil, stone or wood from—  
(i) 
within the distance referred to in paragraph (a) of the proviso to subsection (1);  or  
(ii) 
forest land as defined in the Forest Act [Chapter 19:05];  and  
 (b) shall determine what compensation, if any, is to be paid by the holder of the servitude concerned to the owner 
referred to in paragraph (a) in respect of any loss or damage which may result from any taking authorized 
in terms of that paragraph.  
81 
Lapse of servitudes  
(1) A servitude shall lapse—  
(a) if the water works specified in the relevant request in terms of subsection (1) of section seventy-five 
are  


--- PAGE 34 ---

 
not constructed within a period of three years from the date of acquisition of the servitude or such longer 
period as may be agreed or, failing agreement, as may be fixed by the Administrative Court;  
(b) if the Administrative Court so orders on the ground of non-use for a continuous period of three years;  
or  
(c) where the servitude has been granted in respect of a use of water to which a permit relates, if the permit 
lapses and is not renewed.  
(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed as derogating from any law relating to the lapse of 
servitudes.  
82 
Holders of servitudes to construct, maintain and repair water works  
Subject to this Part, the holder of a servitude shall construct, maintain and repair all water works required for 
the enjoyment of the servitude.  
83 
Registration of servitudes awarded by Administrative Court  
(1) The holder of a servitude awarded by the Administrative Court shall cause the servitude to be 
registered against the title to all pieces of land against and, in the case of a praedial servitude, in favour of 
which the servitude has been awarded.  
(2) If within a period of ninety days from the date of the award referred to in subsection (1) the 
servitude concerned has not been registered in terms of that subsection, the Registrar may apply to a 
president of the Administrative Court for an order compelling the owner of the land subject to the servitude 
to produce his title deed in respect of such land to the Registrar of Deeds within such period as may be 
specified in the order.  
(3) Any person who fails to comply with an order in terms of subsection (2) shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level four.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
(4) The owner of land or any other person in whose favour a servitude has been awarded by the 
Administrative Court shall bear all the costs of registration of the servitude and of preparing documents 
required therefor.  
84 
Registration of servitudes acquired by agreement  
(1) Whenever a servitude has been claimed and every interested party has agreed to the claim, the 
agreement shall not be binding on any person other than the parties to agreement unless the servitude has 
been registered against the title to all pieces of land against which and, in the case of a praedial servitude, 
in favour of which the servitude has been so acquired.  
(2) If any party to an agreement referred to in subsection (1) wishes to register the servitude acquired 
thereunder and another party to the agreement fails to produce the relevant title deed, the party wishing so 
to register may apply to a president of the Administrative Court for an order compelling the other party to 
produce his title deed in respect of the land to the Registrar within such period as may be specified in the 
order.   
(3) Any person who fails to comply with an order in terms of subsection (2) shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level four.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
(4) The person acquiring the servitude concerned under an agreement referred to in subsection (1) 
shall bear all the costs of registration of the servitude and of preparing documents required therefor.  
85 
Registration of servitudes in Deeds registry  
(1) For the purpose of registration of a servitude, there shall be lodged with the Registrar of Deeds the 
necessary registration fees together with—  
(a) in the case of a servitude awarded by the Administrative Court, two copies of the award duly certified 
by the Registrar:  
   Provided that no such copies shall be lodged with the Registrar of Deeds until after the expiry of the period within 
which notice of appeal to the Supreme Court from such award may be given or, if  
notice of appeal has been given, until the award of the servitude has been confirmed on appeal or the 
appeal concerned has not been prosecuted or has been dismissed;  or  
(b) in the case of a servitude acquired under an agreement referred to in subsection (1) of section 
eightyfour, the copies of the agreement and such other documents as may be required by the Registrar 
of Deeds for the registration of the servitude.  
(2) On receipt of the fees and documents referred to in subsection (1), the Registrar of Deeds shall, if 
satisfied that the fees and documents are in order, cause the servitude concerned to be registered on the title 
deeds of all pieces of land affected by it and in the appropriate registers in accordance with the terms of the 
award or agreement concerned:  


--- PAGE 35 ---

 
Provided that the Registrar of Deeds may refuse to register a servitude referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection 
(1) if, in his opinion, the agreement is not reasonably free from ambiguity.  
(3) If the owner of land subject to a servitude fails to produce his copy of the title deed of the land for 
the purpose of registration, the Registrar of Deeds shall note the servitude on the title deed in the Deeds 
Registry and in the appropriate registers.  
(4) After making a note in terms of subsection (3), no other act of registration shall be made in respect 
of the piece of land concerned until the servitude has been registered on the title deed of the owner of the 
land.  
(5) If the title deed referred to in subsection (4) is for any reason lodged with the Registrar of Deeds 
he shall retain the title deed until the servitude concerned has been registered thereon.  
(6) Whenever a formal or other minor alteration in the wording of a servitude awarded by the 
Administrative Court is required for the purpose of registering the servitude, the alteration may be made 
under the signature of the president of the Administrative Court.  
(7) For the purpose of registering a servitude which, in the opinion of the Registrar of Deeds, cannot 
adequately be defined by description, a diagram prepared in accordance with the Land Survey Act [Chapter 
20:12] shall be submitted to him showing the land subject to, and the situation thereon of, the servitude.  
PART VIII  
COMBINED WATER SCHEMES  
86 
Interpretation in Part VIII  
In this Part—  
“petition” means a petition made in terms of section eighty-seven;  
“petitioner” means an owner of land referred to in section eighty-seven;  
“scheme” means a combined water scheme referred to in section eighty-seven.  
87 
Petitions for schemes  
(1) If any two or more owners of land consider that—  
(a) there should be a combined water scheme for the area comprising the land owned by them;  and  
(b) recourse should be had to artificial means of storing or supplying water in the area referred to in 
paragraph (a);  
they shall address to the catchment council a petition in the prescribed form stating—  
 (i) the reasons why the proposed combined water scheme is desirable;  and  
(ii) 
the nature of the proposed combined water scheme;  and  
(iii) the boundaries and approximate extent of the area of the proposed combined water scheme;  
and  
(iv) specific uses to which the water is intended to be put by the persons participating in the 
proposed combined water scheme;  
and setting out the names of not less than two and not more than four petitioners who are able and willing to serve 
on an investigatory committee referred to in section eighty-eight.  
(2) A petition referred to in subsection (1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  
88 
Investigation and report on petition  
(1) The catchment council shall, on receipt of a petition referred to in section eighty-seven—  
(a) appoint such persons as it considers appropriate to be members of an investigatory committee whose 
chairman shall be a civil engineer appointed by the catchment council;  and  
(b) refer the petition to the investigatory committee and require the civil engineer to prepare a report on 
the petition.  
(2) The civil engineer referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) shall—  
(a) set out in his report the nature, scope and approximate cost of the proposed scheme, together with such 
other information as the catchment council may specify;  and  
(b) furnish copies of the report to each of the owners of land within the area which may be affected by the 
proposed scheme within such period as the catchment council may fix;  and  
(c) request the owners referred to in paragraph (b) to notify the catchment council within a period of thirty 
days of receiving such report whether or not they consent to participate in the proposed scheme and, if 
they do not consent, whether or not they are opposed to the proposed scheme.  
(3) On the receipt of the notifications referred to in paragraph (c) of subsection (2), the catchment 
council shall, before considering the petition, ascertain that the owners of not less than two-thirds of the 
land within the area of the proposed scheme consent to participate in the proposed scheme.  


--- PAGE 36 ---

 
89 
Consideration of petition by catchment council  
 
.In considering a petition, a catchment council shall have regard to—  
  
(a) the extent and nature of all irrigable land in the area capable of being irrigated by the water which it is 
proposed to use;  and  
(b) the extent and nature of any other industrial or commercial activity intending to participate in the 
scheme;  
(c) the economic aspects of the proposed scheme;  and  
(d) such other matters, as appear to the catchment council to be relevant.  
90 
Powers and duties of catchment council in relation to petitions  
(1) A catchment council may, having considered a petition in terms of section eighty-nine, approve 
the petition subject to such modifications as it thinks fit, or reject the petition.  
(2) In approving a proposed scheme, a catchment council may—  
(a) require the petitioners concerned to form, within such period as the catchment council may specify, a 
company limited by shares in terms of Part II of the Companies Act [Chapter 24:03] for the purpose 
of administering the scheme;  and  
(b) allocate the quantity of water to be used for any agricultural, institutional or miscellaneous purposes 
within such scheme and impose on holders of individual permits for the use of water the obligation to 
surrender the permits for the benefit of the scheme as a condition of their participation in the scheme;  
and  
(c) state the quantity of water allocated in respect of each activity in the scheme and the maximum 
expenditure that may be incurred in carrying out the scheme unless a higher maximum expenditure is 
agreed by the owners of the pieces of land;  and  
(d) subject to this section, issue a permit in respect of the scheme.  
(3) A catchment council may, in allocating the quantity of water to be used within a scheme, allocate 
for primary purposes such quantity of water as it thinks fit.  
(4) A catchment council shall, if water is allocated for use in terms of subsection (3)—  
(a) specify, in respect of each piece of land to which a quantity of water has been allocated in terms of 
paragraph (c) of subsection (2), the maximum quantify of water which may be so used;  and  
(b) in the case of a piece of land referred to in paragraph (a) which has been or is consolidated or 
subdivided, revise the maximum quantity referred to in that paragraph in respect of the consolidation 
or apportion such maximum quantity of water or a quantity of water greater than the maximum quantity 
between the subdivisions concerned and the remaining extent of the piece of land.  
91 
Allocation of water by catchment council for use in schemes  
A catchment council may within an existing scheme allocate water for use for primary purposes, agricultural 
purposes, institutional purposes or miscellaneous purposes on land within the area of the scheme for the benefit of 
the participants in the scheme.  
92 
Alteration of areas within, or quantities of water allocated in respect of, schemes  
(1) A catchment council may, at the request of any occupier of land affected by an existing scheme 
who wishes to participate in the scheme—  
(a) authorize the alteration of the area within, or of the quantity of water allocated in respect of, the scheme;  
and  
(b) fix the proportion of the cost of the alteration referred to in paragraph (a) to be paid by the occupier of 
land benefiting by such alteration.  
(2) In ascertaining the cost referred to in paragraph (b) subsection (1), the catchment council shall 
have regard to—  
(a) the cost of the alteration concerned;  and  
(b) the amount of capital expended on the original scheme;  
and may, on good cause shown, allow the incurring of expenditure in excess of the maximum expenditure referred 
to in paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of section ninety.  
93 
Allocation of water in combined water schemes may be cancelled or revised  
A catchment council may, if the user of water allocated in terms of paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of section  
ninety fails without sufficient cause to make full beneficial use of such allocation, of its own motion or at the request 
of any interested party, cancel or revise such allocation.  
94 
Liability of owners of land benefiting from schemes  
(1) Any occupier of land which is affected by a scheme and to which the water from the scheme may 
be available shall, unless exempted by the catchment council from doing so for good and sufficient reason, 


--- PAGE 37 ---

 
be liable to pay to the company referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection (2) of section ninety a portion of 
the moneys which may have been expended on the scheme.  
(2) The liability of the occupier referred to in subsection (1) shall, if not at once discharged, be a first 
charge or mortgage on his land:  
Provided that, if such land is already mortgaged and the mortgagee does not assent to the scheme concerned 
such liability shall rank as a preferent charge next after such first charge or mortgage.  
(3) The proportion of the moneys referred to in subsection (1) to be paid by each occupier of land shall 
be determined in accordance with the quantity of water allocated to his piece of land in terms of paragraph 
(c) of subsection (2) of section ninety.  
95 
Allocation or apportionment of rights to use water on consolidation or subdivision of land in 
scheme area  
(1) Whenever a piece of land within the area of an existing scheme is to be consolidated with another 
piece of land or subdivided, the owner of the first mentioned piece of land shall, prior to the consolidation 
or subdivision, lodge with appropriate catchment council an application for the allocation or apportionment 
of his entitlement to the use of water and section fifty-three shall apply, mutatis mutandis.  
(2) An allocation or apportionment resulting from an application in terms of subsection (1) shall form 
part of the scheme concerned.  
(3) In the event of the proposed transfer of a subdivision of land within the area of a scheme, the 
transferor shall, before such transfer takes place, construct to the satisfaction of the catchment council such 
water works as may be necessary for the supply of water to the subdivision.  
(4) The company concerned shall—  
(a) maintain;  and  
(b) obtain and conserve a supply of water for;  and  
(c) arrange for an equitable distribution of any water diverted or stored by; any waterworks constructed in 
terms of subsection (3).  
PART IX  
SAFETY OF DAMS  
96 
Interpretation in Part IX  
(1) In this Part—  
“advisory panel” means an advisory panel appointed in terms of subsection (3) of section  ninety-eight.  
“approved civil engineer” means a civil engineer who has been declared to be an approved civil engineer in 
terms of subsection (5) of section ninety-eight;   
“approved civil engineering technician” means a civil engineering technician who has been declared to be an 
approved civil engineering technician in terms of subsection (4) of section ninety-eight;  
“appurtenant works” means any works which contribute directly or indirectly to the functioning, operation or 
safety of a small dam or large dam and includes—  
(a) outlet works and penstocks, pipelines, tunnels and other water conduits, whether running 
through the structure of the small dam or large dam or the abutments thereof;  and  
(b) gated and ungated spillways and erosion control and energy dissipating works, whether in the 
structure of the small dam or large dam or separate therefrom;  and  
(c) anchoring, buttressing, drainage and other stabilising works in original earth or rock slopes, 
whether downstream or upstream of the small dam or large dam;  and  
(d) devices or works for measuring flow, movement, pore water pressure, seepage, strain, 
temperature or uplift pressure, whether in the structure of the small dam or large dam or separate 
therefrom;  and  
(e) such other works as may be declared in terms of subsection (2) to be appurtenant works;  
“board of consultants” means a board of consultants appointed in terms of subsection (1) of section one hundred 
and six;  
“dam works” means the alteration, construction, reconstruction or removal of a small dam or large dam;  
“design flood”, in relation to a small dam or large dam, means the estimated maximum flow of water resulting 
from floods or other causes, which flow—  
(a) is required to pass through the  spillway or other discharge facilities;  and  
(b) is approved or fixed in relation to the small dam or large dam concerned in terms of subsection  
(3);  


--- PAGE 38 ---

 
“dry freeboard” means the vertical distance between the water level attained when the design flood is being 
passed and the level of the non-overflow crest of the wall of the small dam or large dam concerned;  
“full supply level” means that water level which pertains immediately prior to the release of excess flood water 
through the spillway;  
“high flood level” means the maximum level of water which can safely be contained by a small dam or large 
dam without encroaching on the dry freeboard thereof;  
“large dam” means a structure, whether constructed or proposed to be constructed, which, together with its 
abutments, appurtenant works and foundations, is capable of diverting or storing water and which—  
(a) has a vertical height of fifteen metres or more measured from the non-overflow crest of the wall 
of the structure to the lowest point on the downstream face of the wall; or  
(b) is capable of storing one million or more cubic metres of water at full supply level;  or  
(c) has foundations which, in the opinion of the Secretary as notified to the owner of the structure, 
may or causes special or unexpected difficulties;  or  
(d) in the opinion of the Secretary as notified to the owner of such structure, is a small dam of 
unusual design;  or  
(e) is declared in terms of subsection (2) to be a large dam;  
“owner”, in relation to a small dam or large dam—  
(a) means the person entitled to divert or store water by means of the small dam or large dam;  and  
(b) includes the legal representative of any person referred to in paragraph (a) who has died, become 
insolvent, is a minor or of unsound mind or is otherwise under disability and, in the case of a 
company, the liquidator of the company;  
“registration certificate” means a registration certificate issued in terms of subsection (2) of section one 
hundred, subsection (2) of section one hundred and one or subsection (2) of section one hundred and four;  
“small dam” means a structure, whether constructed or proposed to be constructed, which, together with its 
abutments, appurtenant works and foundations, is capable of diverting or storing water and which—  
(a) has a vertical height of more than eight metres but less than fifteen metres measured from the 
non-overflow crest of the wall of such structure to the lowest point on the downstream face of 
such wall;  or  
(b) is capable of storing more than five hundred thousand but less than one million cubic metres of 
water at full supply level;  or  
(c) is declared in terms of subsection (2) to be a small dam.  
(2) The Minister, on the recommendation of the National Water Authority and in consultation with the 
catchment council concerned, may, by notice in writing given to the owner of the small dam or large dam 
concerned—  
(a) declare any works, other than works referred to in paragraphs (a) to (d) of the definition of “appurtenant 
works” in subsection (1), to be appurtenant works;  
(b) declare any structure, other than a structure referred to in paragraphs (a) to (c) of the definition of 
“small dam” in subsection (1) or in paragraphs (a) to (e) of the definition of “large dam” in that 
subsection, which, together with its abutments, appurtenant works and foundations, is capable of 
diverting or storing water to be a small dam or large dam, as the case may be;  
for the purposes of this Part.  
(3) The Secretary, in consultation with the catchment council concerned, may approve or fix, in 
relation to a small dam or large dam, a flow of water as the design flood thereof.  
97 
Minister may grant exemptions  
(1) The Minister may, in consultation with the catchment council and the National Water Authority,  
may, by notice in writing and subject to such conditions as he may impose, exempt any person from 
compliance with all or any of the provisions of this Part in respect of any large dam, small dam, dam works 
or appurtenant works proposed to be constructed in respect of any public stream which forms any part of 
the international boundary of Zimbabwe.  
(2) The Minister may at any time, on the recommendation of the National Water Authority in 
consultation with the catchment council, withdraw or amend any exemption granted in terms of subsection 
(1).  
98 
Approved civil engineers and approved civil engineering technicians  
(1) Any person who wishes to become an approved civil engineer or an approved civil engineering 
technician shall apply in the prescribed manner to the Secretary to be declared an approved civil engineer 
or approved civil engineering technician, as the case may be, in terms of subsection (4).  


--- PAGE 39 ---

 
(2) On receipt of an application in terms of subsection (1), the Secretary shall refer the application to 
an advisory panel for consideration and recommendation:  
Provided that the Secretary may, if he considers that the application does not provide sufficient information 
concerning the applicant, require the applicant to furnish the Secretary with such additional information concerning 
the applicant as the Secretary may specify before so referring the application.  
(3) An advisory panel shall—  
(a) be appointed by the Secretary;  and  
(b) consist of two or more civil engineers who have wide experience of the design and construction of 
dams and large dams or such other experience as the Secretary may approve;  and  
(c) consider and make recommendations on applications or matters referred to it in terms of subsection 
(2) or (6), as the case may be.  
(4) Members of any advisory panel shall be paid from moneys appropriated for the purpose by Act of 
Parliament such remuneration or allowances as the Minister, after consultation with the Minister 
responsible for finance, may fix.  
(5) On receipt of a recommendation from an advisory panel on an application in terms of subsection 
(1), the Secretary shall—  
 (a) if he considers that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications for and experience of dam works and is 
a fit and proper person, by notice in the Gazette, declare the applicant to be an approved civil engineer or an approved 
civil engineering technician, as the case may be, subject to such conditions as he thinks fit to impose;  or  (b) refuse 
the application:  
   Provided that the Secretary shall, before refusing an application, afford the applicant an opportunity to satisfy the 
Secretary that he does possess the necessary qualifications for or experience of dam works or is a fit and 
proper person, as the case may be.  
(6) The Secretary may, if he thinks that—  
(a) the declaration of an approved civil engineer or approved civil engineering technician should be 
withdrawn;  or  
(b) the conditions subject to which the declaration of an approved civil engineer or approved civil 
engineering technician was made should be amended;    
refer the matter to an advisory panel for consideration and recommendation.  
(7) On receipt of a recommendation from an advisory panel on a matter referred to it in terms of 
subsection (6), the Secretary shall—  
 (a) if he considers that the declaration of the approved civil engineer or approved civil engineering technician 
concerned should be withdrawn or that the conditions subject to which the declaration was made should 
be amended, by notice in the Gazette, withdraw the declaration or amend the conditions:  
   Provided that, if the withdrawal or amendment will or is likely to prejudice the approved civil engineer or approved 
civil engineering technician, the Secretary shall, before withdrawing the declaration or amending such conditions, 
afford the approved civil engineer or approved civil engineering technician an opportunity to satisfy the Secretary 
that the declaration should not be withdrawn or that the conditions should not be amended;  or  (b) take no action in 
the matter.  
99 
When dam works in respect of small dams may be commenced  
.(1)  Subject to Part IV, no person shall commence any dam works in respect of a small dam other than action 
referred to in section one hundred and nine or one hundred and ten, until the expiry of a period of thirty days after—  
  
(a) an approved civil engineer or approved civil engineering technician has—  
(i) 
prepared a design, together with plans and specifications, of the proposed dam works;  and  
(ii) 
certified the adequacy and safety of the proposed dam works and, in the case of modifications 
to an existing small dam, that the adequacy and safety of the small dam will not be 
prejudiced;  and  
 (b) the owner of the small dam has submitted to the Secretary in the prescribed manner, together with such fee as 
may be prescribed, such details of the design, plans and specifications prepared in terms of paragraph (a) 
as may be prescribed, together with the certificate of adequacy and safety referred to in subparagraph (ii) 
of that paragraph.  
(2)  The Secretary may require the owner of the small dam concerned—  
(a) to provide the additional information;  and  
(b) to modify such design, plans and specifications in such manner;  and   (c) to 
provide such additional certificates of adequacy and safety; as, and within such 
period as, the Secretary may specify.  
(3)  A person who—  


--- PAGE 40 ---

 
(a) commences dam works in contravention of subsection (1);  or  
(b) fails without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement made in terms of subsection (2);  or  
(c) being the owner of the small dam concerned, fails to ensure that the dam works in respect of the dam 
are  
completed in accordance with the details submitted in terms of subsection (1) and to the satisfaction of an 
approved civil engineer or approved civil engineering technician;  
shall be guilty of an offence.  
(4)  If during the execution of any dam works the owner of the small dam concerned wishes to modify the 
details submitted in terms of subsection (1), subsections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, in respect of 
such modification.  
100 
Duties of owners on completion of small dam works in respect of dams and registration  
(1) The owner of a small dam shall, within a period of—  
(a) thirty days from the completion of any dam works in respect of the small dam, notify the Secretary 
and the catchment council in writing of the completion;  and  
(b) one hundred and twenty days from the completion of any dam works in respect of the small dam or 
such longer period as the Secretary may allow, submit to the Secretary and the National Water 
Authority—  
(i) 
a report in the prescribed form;  and  
(ii) 
such plans certified as true and correct by the approved civil engineer or approved civil 
engineering technician concerned, as the case may be, of the completed dam works as may 
be prescribed;  and  
(iii) a completion certificate in the prescribed form of the adequacy, safety and completion of the 
dam works, signed by the approved civil engineer or approved civil engineering technician 
concerned, as the case may be;  and  
(iv) in the case of dam works other than the construction of a small dam, the registration 
certificate, if any, issued in respect of the small dam;  and  
(v) 
when requested by the Secretary or the National Water Authority to do so, such further 
information as the Secretary or the National Water Authority may specify.  
(2) On receipt of the report, plans and completion certificate and any registration certificate or further 
information submitted to him in terms of subsection (1), the Secretary shall, in consultation with the 
National Water Authority—  
(a) in the case of the construction of a small dam, register the small dam and issue to the owner a 
registration certificate in the prescribed form;  or  
(b) in the case of dam works other than the construction or removal of a small dam, amend the registration 
of the small dam;  
(c) in the case of the removal of a small dam, cancel both the registration of the small dam and the 
registration certificate concerned.  
(3) The owner of a small dam who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable 
to a fine not exceeding level five or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such 
fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
101 
Reporting of small dams in certain areas  
(1) If the Secretary, on the recommendation of the National Water Authority and in consultation with 
the catchment council, considers it necessary or desirable to do so, he may, by notice in the Gazette and in 
a newspaper circulating in the area concerned, require the owners of existing small dams within the area 
specified in the notice to notify him in writing, within such period as may be specified in the notice, of such 
particulars as he may specify in the notice in respect of the small dams, whether or not section one hundred  
has been complied with in respect of the small dams.  
(2) On receipt of the details submitted to him in terms of subsection (1), the Secretary shall, in the case 
of a small dam in respect of which no registration certificate has been issued, register the small dam and 
issue to the owner a registration certificate in the prescribed form:  
Provided that the Secretary may, in registering the small dam, require the owner to comply within such period 
as the Secretary may specify and subject to such conditions as the Secretary may consider necessary for the 
protection of persons and property.  
(3) A person who fails to comply with a requirement made in terms of subsection (1) or the proviso to 
subsection (2) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level five or to imprisonment 
for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  


--- PAGE 41 ---

 
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
102 
When dam works in respect of large dams may be commenced  
(1) Subject to Part IV, no person shall commence any dam works in respect of a large dam, other than 
action referred to in section one hundred and nine or one hundred and ten—  
  
(a) until—  
(i) 
an approved civil engineer, assisted by such qualified engineers, geologists and other 
specialists as the Secretary in consultation with the National Water Authority may require, 
has—  
A. prepared a design, together with plans and specifications, of the proposed dam works;  
and  
B. certified the adequacy and safety of the proposed dam works and, in the case of  
modifications to an existing small dam or large dam, that the adequacy and safety of the 
small dam or large dam will not be prejudiced;  and  
(ii) 
the owner of the large dam has submitted to the Secretary in the prescribed manner, together 
with such fee as may be prescribed, such details of the design, plans and specifications 
prepared in terms of subparagraph (i) as may be prescribed, together with the certificate of 
adequacy and safety referred to in that subparagraph, and the Secretary has approved the 
details in writing;  and  
(iii) the expiry of a period of ten days after the owner of the large dam has given notice in writing 
to the Secretary of the proposed commencement of the dam works;  or   
 (b) after the expiry of a period of twelve months from the date on which the Secretary approved the details referred 
to in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (a):  
   Provided that the Secretary may, on the application in writing of the owner concerned, extend the period for such 
further period or periods in aggregate not exceeding thirty-six months as the Secretary may specify.  
(2) The Secretary may, before approving the details referred to in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (a) 
of subsection (1), require the owner of the large dam concerned—  (a) to cause such further investigations 
to be made;  and  
(b) to provide such additional information;  and  
(c) to modify the design, plans and specifications concerned in such manner; and  
(d) to provide such additional certificates of adequacy and safety; as, and within such period as, the 
Secretary may specify.  
(3) A person who commences dam works in contravention of subsection (1) shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level seven or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six 
months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
103 
Supervision of dam works in respect of large dams  
(1) The owner of a large dam referred to in section one hundred and two shall cause an approved civil 
engineer—  
(a) to arrange for the adequate supervision of the progress of the dam works concerned for the purpose of 
securing compliance with the design, plans and specifications approved in respect of the dam works;  
and  
(b) to maintain up-to-date drawings of the dam works concerned;  and  
(c) if so required by the Secretary, the National Water Authority and the catchment council, to submit to 
the Secretary, the National Water Authority and the catchment council such progress reports on the 
dam works concerned within such periods as the Secretary, the National Water Authority or the 
catchment council may specify.  
(2) The owner referred to in subsection (1) shall, if the approved civil engineer concerned considers 
that modifications to the details approved in respect of the dam works concerned are necessary—  (a) notify 
the Secretary in writing;  and  (b) obtain his approval in writing; of the modifications before causing the 
modifications to be made.   
(3) The Secretary, the National Water Authority, the catchment council or any person authorized 
thereto in writing by them may, at any time during the progress of any dam works in respect of a large dam, 
have access to the dam works for the purpose of inspection.  
(4) The Secretary, the National Water Authority or the catchment council may, as a result of 
information received during the progress of dam works in respect of a large dam, require the owner of the 
dam to cause the approved civil engineer concerned to modify any design, plans or specifications relating 
to the dam works.  


--- PAGE 42 ---

 
(5) The owner of a large dam who contravenes subsection (1) or (2) or fails to comply with a 
requirement made in terms of subsection (4) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding 
level seven or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and such 
imprisonment.  
104 
Duties of owners on completion of dam works in respect of large dams and registration  
(1) The owner of a large dam shall, within a period of—  
(a) thirty days from the completion of any dam works in respect of the large dam, notify the Secretary and 
the catchment council in writing of the completion;  and  
(b) one hundred and twenty days from the completion of dam works in respect of the large dam or such 
longer period as the Secretary may allow, submit to the Secretary, the National Water Authority and 
the catchment council—  
(i) 
a report in the prescribed form;  and  
(ii) 
such plans certified as true and correct by the approved civil engineer concerned of the 
completed dam works as may be prescribed;  and  
(iii) a completion certificate in the prescribed form of the adequacy, safety and completion of the 
dam works, signed by the approved civil engineer concerned;  and  
(iv) in the case of dam works other than the construction of a large dam, the registration 
certificate, if any, issued in respect of the small dam or large dam.  
(2) On receipt of the report, plans and completion certificate and any registration certificate submitted 
to him in terms of subsection (1), the Secretary shall, if he is satisfied that the dam works concerned are 
adequate and safe—  
(a) in the case of the construction of a large dam, register the large dam and issue to the owner a registration 
certificate in the prescribed form;  or  
(b) in the case of dam works other than the construction or removal of a large dam, register the large dam 
and issue to the owner concerned a registration certificate in the prescribed for or amend the 
registration certificate concerned and return it to the owner, as the case may be;  
(c) in the case of the removal of a large dam, cancel both the registration of the large dam and the 
registration certificate concerned.  
(3) The owner of a large dam who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and liable 
to a fine not exceeding level six or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such 
fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
105 
Periodic inspections of large dams  
(1) The owner of a large dam shall—  
(a) cause an approved civil engineer to prepare instructions relating to the maintenance and operation of 
the large dam;  and  
(b) cause the large dam to be maintained and operated in accordance with instructions prepared in terms 
of paragraph (a) and with such additional instructions as the Secretary or the catchment council may 
from time to time give to him;  and  
(c) cause detailed measurements and observations of the large dam to be made by such person in such 
manner and at such intervals as the Secretary or the catchment council may require;  and  
(d) whenever requested to do so by the Secretary or the catchment council and, in addition, before the end 
of the month of June or of such other month as the catchment council may specify immediately 
following—  
(i) 
the first season during which water was diverted or stored by the large dam;  and  
(ii) 
the first season during which water spilled from the large dam;  and  
(iii) each successive period of five years reckoned from the date of completion of construction 
of the large dam;  
  
 cause a detailed engineering inspection of the large dam to be carried out by an approved civil engineer;  
and  
  
(e) within a period of thirty days from the date of completion of—  
(i) 
any measurements and observations made in terms of paragraph (c), submit to the Secretary 
and the National Water Authority such report thereon as the Secretary and the National Water 
Authority may specify;  and  
(ii) any detailed engineering inspection carried out in terms of paragraph (d), submit to the 
Secretary and the National Water Authority such report thereon as the National Water Authority 
may specify, together with a summary of the maintenance measures carried out since the date 


--- PAGE 43 ---

 
of completion of the large dam or of the previous such detailed engineering inspection, as the 
case may be.  
(2) The Secretary, the National Water Authority or any person authorized by them in writing may at 
any time carry out a detailed engineering inspection of a large dam.  
(3) The owner of a large dam shall provide the Secretary, the National Water Authority or any person 
authorized in terms of subsection (2), with such assistance and facilities in the carrying out of the inspection 
referred to in that subsection as the Secretary, the National Water Authority or such person may reasonably 
require.  
(4) If, as a result of any measurements and observations made in terms of paragraph (c) of subsection 
(1) or of a detailed engineering inspection carried out in terms of paragraph (d) of that subsection or in 
terms of subsection (2) or of a report submitted in terms of paragraph (e) of subsection (1), the Secretary in 
consultation with the National Water Authority considers that the large dam concerned is inadequate or 
unsafe, he may require the owner of the large dam to remedy, within such period as the Secretary may 
specify, the inadequacy or lack of safety concerned to the satisfaction of the Secretary.  
(5) If the owner of a large dam fails to comply with a requirement made in terms of subsection (4)—  
 
(a) without reasonable excuse the onus of proof of which lies on him, he shall be guilty of an 
offence;  
 (b) the National Water Authority may remedy the inadequacy or lack of safety concerned and recover the cost of 
so doing, together with interest on such cost, from the owner by—  (i) proceedings in a court of competent 
jurisdiction against the owner; or  
 (ii) if the owner is the owner of the piece of land on which the large dam or a portion thereof is situated, directing 
that the Registrar of Deeds make a note on the title deeds of the piece of land and in the appropriate 
register.  
(6) On receipt of a direction made in terms of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) of subsection (5), the 
Registrar of Deeds shall make the note specified in the direction.  
(7) The owner of the piece of land referred to in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b) of subsection (5) 
shall, at the request of the Registrar of Deeds, produce his title deed in respect of the piece for the purpose 
of the noting referred to in subsection (6).  
(8) If an owner referred to in subsection (7) fails to produce his title deed for the purpose of noting 
referred to in subsection (6), he shall be guilty of an offence.  
(9) A note made in terms of subsection (6) shall constitute a hypothecation of the piece of land 
concerned—   
(a) ranking from the date on which the note was made;  and  
 (b) for the amount stated therein, together with interest thereon determined in terms of the Prescribed Rate of Interest 
Act [Chapter 8:08];  
until such time as the amount and interest referred to in paragraph (b) have been paid to the catchment council.  
(10)The Registrar of Deeds shall not pass transfer of a piece of land hypothecated in terms of subsection 
(9) unless the catchment council has, by notice in writing to the Registrar of Deeds, released the piece of 
land from hypothecation.  
(11)Any person who contravenes subsection (1) or (3) shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine 
not exceeding level six and to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such fine and 
such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
106 
Secretary may appoint board of consultants  
(1) The Secretary in consultation with the catchment council may, if—  
(a) in his opinion the safety considerations relating to a small dam or large dam so require;  or  
(b) the owner of the large dam concerned has failed to comply with a requirement made in terms of 
subsection (4) of section one hundred and five;  
or shall, if he is requested to do so in writing by the owner of a small dam or large dam and the owner gives security 
for the remuneration, allowances and costs referred to in subsection (3), appoint a board of consultants to report to 
him on any action to be taken in relation to the small dam or large dam concerned or to any design, drawings, plans, 
records, reports or specifications relating to the dam.  
(2) A board of consultants shall consist of two or more engineers who have—  
(a) had wide experience of the design and construction of small dams and large dams;  and  
(b) not previously been associated with any dam works in respect of the small dam or large dam concerned.  
(3) If the Minister decides that the owner of the small dam or large dam concerned should pay the 
whole or any part of the remuneration and allowances and of any costs so incurred, together with the costs 
incurred by the State or the National Water Authority in connection with the exercise by the board of 


--- PAGE 44 ---

 
consultants of the functions specified by the Minister, he may deduct the whole or part thereof from the 
security given in terms of subsection (1) or recover the same from the owner by action in a court of 
competent jurisdiction.  
107 
Secretary may require owner to carry out dam works  
(1) On receipt of a report made by a board of consultants, the Secretary may require the owner of the 
small dam or large dam concerned to carry out such dam works as the Secretary in consultation with the 
National Water Authority considers to be necessary within such period as he may specify.  
(2) If the owner of a dam or large dam—  
(a) carries out the small dam works concerned in accordance with a requirement made in terms of 
subsection (1), the Secretary shall register or amend or cancel the registration of, as the case may be, 
the dam or large dam concerned and issue a registration certificate or amend or cancel the registration 
certificate concerned accordingly;  or  
(b) fails, without reasonable excuse the onus of proof of which lies on him, to carry out any dam works 
concerned in accordance with a requirement made in terms of subsection (1), he shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level seven or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 
six months or to both such fine and such imprisonment; or  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
(c) fails to carry out the dam works concerned in accordance with a requirement made in terms of 
subsection (1), the National Water Authority may cause the dam works to be carried out and recover 
the cost of so doing, together with interest on the cost, from the owner by doing either or both of the 
following—  
(i) 
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction against the owner;  or  
(ii) 
if the owner is the owner of the piece of land on which the small dam or large dam or a 
portion thereof is situate, directing that the Registrar of Deeds make a note on the title deeds 
of the piece of land and in the appropriate registers, and subsections (6) to (10) of section 
one hundred and five shall apply, mutatis mutandis;  
  and shall register or amend or cancel the registration, as the case may be, of the small dam or large dam concerned 
and issue a registration certificate or amend or cancel the registration certificate concerned accordingly.  
108 
Rights of access, inspection, investigation and survey  
(1) The Secretary, the National Water Authority, the catchment council or any person authorized 
thereto by the Secretary, the National Water Authority or the catchment council in writing may—  
(a) have access to the site of any dam works, whether proposed or in progress, or to any existing small 
dam or large dam for the purpose of inspection;  and  
(b) if, in their opinion, it is necessary to do so in order to establish the adequacy and safety or otherwise 
of any dam works referred to in paragraph (a), carry out surveys and conduct investigations, whether 
by drilling, excavating, mining or otherwise.  
(2) The provisos to paragraph 12 of the Schedule shall apply, mutatis mutandis, in relation to the 
exercise of any powers in terms of subsection (1).  
109 
Procedure in emergencies  
(1) If the owner of a small dam or large dam learns of any sudden or unprecedented flood or alarming 
or unusual circumstance or occurrence, whether anticipated or existing, which may adversely affect the 
small dam or large dam, he shall, in addition to discharging any duty, liability or obligation imposed on 
him by or under any other law—  
(a) forthwith take all such steps as may be reasonable and practicable for dealing with the flood, 
circumstance or occurrence, as the case may be;  and  
(b) as soon as practicable and by registered letter notify the Secretary and the National Water Authority, 
as fully as possible, of the flood, circumstance or occurrence, as the case may be, and of the action he 
has taken or proposes to take in terms of paragraph (a).  
(2) If the Secretary, whether or not he has been notified in terms of subsection (1), considers that a 
small dam or large dam is in any way endangered he may require the owner of the small dam or large dam 
to take such action as he may specify to deal with the situation either forthwith or within such period as 
may be specified by the Secretary.  
(3) If the Secretary after being notified by the owner of a small dam or large dam in terms of subsection 
(1) considers that the steps taken or proposed to be taken by the owner are inadequate or not sufficiently 
timely for dealing with the situation he may require the owner to take such action as he may specify to deal 
with the situation either forthwith or within such period as may be specified by the Secretary.  


--- PAGE 45 ---

 
(4) An owner who has been required by the Secretary in terms of subsection (2) or (3) to take any 
action shall—  
(a) by registered letter notify the Secretary immediately after commencing to take the action;  or  
(b) report to the Secretary within a period of forty-eight hours after commencing to take the action on the 
progress and results of the action;  and  
(c) comply with such other instructions as the Secretary may from time to time give to him.  
(5) If the owner of a small dam or large dam fails to comply with a requirement made in terms of 
subsection (2) or (3) or to notify or report to the Secretary in contravention of, or to comply with any 
requirement made by the Secretary in terms of, subsection (4)—  
(a) without reasonable excuse the proof of which lies on him, the owner shall be guilty of an offence;  and  
(b) the Secretary shall direct the National Water Authority to take such action as it thinks fit and recover 
the cost of so doing, together with interest on the cost, from the owner by—  
(i) 
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction against the owner; or  
(ii) 
if the owner is the owner of the piece of land on which the  small dam or large dam or a 
portion thereof is situate, directing that the Registrar of Deeds make a note on the title deeds 
of the piece of land and in the appropriate registers, and subsections (6) to (10) of section 
one hundred and five shall apply, mutatis mutandis.  
(6) An owner of a small dam or large dam who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence 
and liable to a fine not exceeding level seven and to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months 
or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
110 
Procedure in emergencies arising during execution of dam works  
(1) If, during the execution of any dam works in respect of a small dam or large dam, any sudden 
danger is posed to any works or structure connected therewith, and such danger renders it necessary to carry 
out immediate dam works otherwise than in accordance with the details submitted in terms of section 
ninety-nine or one hundred and two in respect of the small dam or large dam, as the case may be, the owner 
of the small dam or large dam—  
(a) shall immediately commence the latter dam works notwithstanding that he has not complied with 
subsection (4) of section ninety-nine or subsection (2) of section one hundred and two;  and  
(b) shall, within fourteen days after taking any action in terms of paragraph (a), notify the Secretary and 
the National Water Authority by registered letter as fully as possible of such action and of the 
circumstances necessitating it.  
(2) Any owner of a small dam or large dam who contravenes subsection (1) shall be guilty of an 
offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level six or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months 
or to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
111 
Exemption from liability  
(1) Without prejudice to any defence or limitation which may be available in terms of any law, no 
liability shall attach to the State, the Minister, a catchment council or the National Water Authority or any 
agent or employee of the State, a catchment council or National Water Authority in respect of any loss, 
damage or injury sustained by any person as a result of the exercise or performance or purported exercise 
or performance of or the omission to exercise or perform any power or duty conferred or imposed on the 
Secretary, a catchment council or the National Water Authority or any person authorized by them by or in 
terms of this Part unless the act or omission to act concerned was in bad faith or negligent.  
(2) Nothing done in terms of this Part shall be construed as relieving the owner or person in charge of 
a small dam or large dam of any duty, liability or obligation imposed on him by or under any other law in 
respect of the small dam or large dam.  
PART X  
APPEALS  
112 
Interpretation in Part XI  
In this Part—  
“authority” means the Minister, the Secretary, a catchment council or the National Water Authority, as the case 
may be.  
113 
Composition of Administrative Court for purposes of this Act  


--- PAGE 46 ---

 
(1) For the purpose of hearing any appeal or matter referred to it in terms of this Act, the 
Administrative Court shall consist of a president of the Court and at least two assessors appointed in terms 
of subsection (2).  
(2) Subject to subsection (3), of the assessors referred to in subsection (1)—  
(a) one shall be appointed from a list of persons approved by the Chief Justice who are or have been 
Government water engineers for a period of not less than five years;  and   
(b) one shall be appointed from a list of persons who are not members of the Public Service nominated by 
the Presidents of the Administrative Court and approved by the Chief Justice.  
(3) Whenever the Administrative Court is required to hear and determine any matter the determination 
of which may require special knowledge not ordinarily possessed by an assessor referred to in paragraph 
(b) of subsection (2), the president of the Administrative Court may, after consultation with the Chief 
Justice, appoint a special assessor in lieu of or in addition to the assessor referred to in paragraph (b) of 
subsection (2).  
114 
Appeals against decisions of authority  
(1) Any person who is aggrieved by any decision, direction, order or action of any authority in terms 
of this Act may appeal against the decision, direction, order or action to the Administrative Court in terms 
of this Part.  
(2) A notice of appeal in terms of this section shall be lodged with the Registrar of the Administrative 
Court and the authority concerned within thirty days of the date of the decision, direction, order or action 
appealed against.  
(3) On an appeal in terms of this section, the Administrative Court may confirm, vary or set aside the 
decision, direction, order or action appealed against or give such other decision as in its opinion the 
authority concerned ought to have given, and make such order as to costs as it thinks fit.  
(4) The authority concerned shall comply with any decision of the Administrative Court made in terms 
of this section.  
(5) The Administrative Court Act [Chapter 7:01], shall apply in relation to the procedure and powers 
of the Administrative Court on an appeal in terms of this Part.  
(6) Where an appeal has been noted in terms of this Act, the decision, direction, order or action 
appealed against shall, notwithstanding the noting of the appeal, remain valid pending the determination of 
the matter by the Administrative Court.  
PART XI  
GENERAL  
115 
Maintenance of registers and other records Every catchment council shall—  
(a) maintain or cause to be maintained such registers in the prescribed form in which shall be recorded 
such particulars as may be prescribed of every permit issued in terms of this Act;  
(b) maintain or cause to be maintained such other registers or records as may be prescribed;  
(c) on the payment of a prescribed fee, produce any register or record referred to in this section for 
inspection on demand by any person.  
116 
Service of notices, orders and other documents  
(1) Subject to subsection (3)—  
 (a) any notice, order or other document required by or in terms of this Act to be given to or served on any person 
shall be deemed to be effectively served if—  
(i) 
delivered personally to him;  or  
(ii) 
left at his abode or place of business;  or  
(iii) sent by registered letter to his address;  or  
(iv) in the case of a person who is absent from and has left no known representative in Zimbabwe, 
published in the Gazette;  
 (b) service of a notice, order or other document referred to in paragraph (a) on a person authorized to represent 
another shall be deemed to be service of the notice, order or other document on the person represented.  
(2) In the case of a body corporate or partnership having no domicile or office in Zimbabwe, any 
person in charge of the property of the body corporate or partnership in Zimbabwe shall be deemed to be 
authorized to represent it for the purpose of paragraph (b) of subsection (1).  
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent any person to whom a notice, order or other document referred 
to in subsection (1) has not been delivered personally from proving that, through no fault of his own or of 
his representative, as the case may be, the notice, order or other document never came to his knowledge.  


--- PAGE 47 ---

 
117 
Validity of defective notices, orders and other documents  
Any notice, order or other document authenticated or issued by any officer in terms of this Act shall be valid 
from the date of its  authentication or issue, notwithstanding any—  (a) defect of form therein;  or  
 (b) absence of authority on the part of the officer if the requisite authority is subsequently conferred on the officer.  
118 
Offences and penalties  
(1) Any person who, without lawful excuse the onus of proof  of which lies on him—  
(a) alters, enlarges or obstructs any water works or defaces, destroys or moves any beacon, lawful mark 
or other appliance or structure made or erected in connection with the water works;  or  
(b) abstracts, diverts, stores or uses any water, including water—  
(i) 
to which the National Water Authority has obtained a right; or  
(ii) 
which is subject to the control of the National Water Authority;   
 in terms of section 
thirty-nine;  or  
(c) alters or interferes with the flow of the water of any water works or of a public stream or 
interferes with the distribution of the water or, after service on him of a notice requiring him to 
refrain from doing so, abstracts more of the water than he is entitled to abstract or uses the water 
in a manner prohibited by this Act;  or  
(d) while liable for the maintenance of or using any water works, to the prejudice of others—  
 
(i) fails properly to maintain and to keep the water works in repair;  or  
  
(ii) wastes or does not take due precaution to prevent the waste of water from the water works;  or   
(e) 
wastes the water of a public stream;  or  
(f) being the owner of any land, fails, after service on him of notice of the failure, to put an end to waste 
of water resulting from the act or omission of a lessee or occupier or other person deriving rights from 
the owner and no longer present on the land;  or  
(g) constructs any borehole, shaft, well or other work or does any other thing which is intended to have 
the effect of abstracting water lawfully diverted or stored by another person;  or  
(h) interferes with the banks, bed or course of a public stream or any marshes, springs, swamps or vleis 
forming the source of a public stream or found along its course;  or  
(i) contravenes section fifty-two or Part V;  or  
(j) hinders or obstructs any officer or authorized person in the exercise of any power conferred on him by 
this Act;    
shall be guilty of an offence and liable, subject to subsection (2)—  
  
(i) to a fine of—  
A. not exceeding level eight;  or  
[Subparagraph amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
B. an amount equivalent to twice the amount of any profit or advantage unlawfully 
gained or acquired or any prejudice caused by the convicted person as a result of the 
offence;  
  
 whichever is the greater;  or  
  
(ii) to imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years;  or  
 (iii) to both such fine and such imprisonment.  
(2) Any person who—  
(a) has been convicted of an offence in terms of subsection (1) or of Part VI or IX;  and  
(b) persists, after a conviction referred to in paragraph (a), in the course of conduct which constituted the 
offence concerned;  
shall be guilty of a continuing offence and liable, in the case of a conviction of an offence referred to in subsection 
(1), to a fine not exceeding level three for every day or part thereof during which he so persists.  
[Subsection amended by section 4 of Act 22 of 2001]  
(3) Any person who places any poison in any water shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine 
not exceeding level twelve or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or to both such fine 
and such imprisonment and the court may order the person concerned to—  
(a) take such remedial action, specified by the court on the advice of the National Water 
Authority, as may be necessary;  
(b) reimburse the National Water Authority for any remedial action taken by it;  and  
 
(c) pay compensation for any damage caused.  
119 
Regulations  


--- PAGE 48 ---

 
(1) The Minister may, in consultation with the National Water Authority, make regulations providing 
for all matters which by this Act are required or permitted to be prescribed or which, in his opinion, are 
necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out, or giving effect to, this Act.  
(2) Regulations made in terms of subsection (1) may provide for—  
(a) the manner of issue, amendment or withdrawal, and the form of any permit  and the fees to be charged 
in connection therewith;  
(b) ….  
[Paragraph repealed by section 142 of Act 13 of 2002]  
(c) in consultation with the Minister responsible for environment, the manner in which samples of any 
gas, liquid or solid shall be taken by any person for the purposes of Part VI;  
[Paragraph amended by section 142 of Act 13 of 2002 and by section 27 of Act 6 of 2005]  
(d) the manner and form in which registers of permits and other records relating to the general management 
of the water resources of a river system shall be maintained by catchment councils;  
(e) the methods of testing any borehole or well;  
(f) the hire of drills and mechanical equipment belonging to the State;  
(g) the drilling of boreholes, sinking of wells and construction of water works for any person and the fees 
payable in respect thereof;  
(h) engineering and advice and assistance by officers and any fees payable in respect thereof;   
(i) 
combined water schemes;  
 (j) the functions and procedure of catchment councils, the election or appointment of members of catchment 
councils and the levying and collection of water charges, rates and fees for any service rendered by 
catchment councils.  
(3) ….  
[Subsection repealed by section 142 of Act 13 of 2002]  
(4) Any person who contravenes any regulations made in terms of subsection (1) shall be guilty of an 
offence.  
120 
Savings in relation to Zambezi River Authority  
Notwithstanding this Act, the Zambezi River Authority referred to in section 4 of the Zambezi River Authority 
Act [Chapter 20:23] may continue to perform its functions and exercise its rights in relation to the use, extraction 
and storage of water in or from the Zambezi river in respect of the Kariba dam, the Kariba hydroelectric scheme and 
any other undertakings which are conferred upon it by or in terms of that Act.  
PART XII  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
121 
Interpretation in Part XIII  
In this Part—  
“fixed date” means the date fixed in terms of subsection (2) of section one as the date of commencement of 
this Act;  
“repealed Act” means the Water Act [Chapter 20:22];  
“river board” means a river board which was established under the repealed Act and was in existence 
immediately before the fixed date.  
122 
Repeal  
Subject to this Part, the Water Act [Chapter 20:22], is repealed.  
123 
Continuation of river boards and succession by catchment councils  
(1) Until a subcatchment council has been established under this Act, any river board established in 
respect of any area in terms of the repealed Act shall continue in existence and the relevant provisions of 
the repealed Act shall continue to apply in respect of the river board.  
(2) Any proceeding or matter which was pending or existing by or against a river board immediately 
before the fixed date or the date on which the successor subcatchment council is established, whichever is 
the later, may be continued or be enforced by or against the successor subcatchment council as it might 
have been by or against the river board had this Act not been passed.  
(3) Every river board shall transfer or take such steps as are appropriate to effect the transfer of its 
assets, liabilities and employees to the successor subcatchment council:  
Provided that no employee shall be transferred without his consent.  
(4) For the purpose of any transfer under subsection (3), any agreement, instrument, working 
arrangement or contract of employment giving rise to any asset or liability transferred under subsection (3) 


--- PAGE 49 ---

 
shall have effect as if references therein to the river board were references to the successor subcatchment 
council.  
(5) If any person transferred to the employment of a successor subcatchment council in terms of 
subsection (3) was, immediately before his transfer, serving a period of notice of discharge, resignation or 
retirement which period terminates after his transfer, the notice of discharge, resignation or retirement, as 
the case may be, shall be treated as if it had been given to or by the successor subcatchment council.  
(6) The Minister may make regulations providing, subject to this Part, for all matters which, in his 
opinion, will bring about or facilitate—  
(a) the transfer of assets, liabilities and employees of any river board to a successor subcatchment council;  
and  
(b) the proper and effective operation of any successor subcatchment council.  
and the Minister may give directions to any river board as to the distribution and transfer of any assets, liabilities or 
obligations, and the river board concerned and every member, officer or employee thereof shall comply with every 
such direction.  
124 
Continuation of existing water rights  
(1) Any right to use water in terms of the repealed Act or any other previous Act and subsisting 
immediately before the fixed date shall, on or after the fixed date, continue in existence until amended or 
revised in terms of this Act and shall be deemed to have been granted in terms of a permit issued under this 
Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, this Act shall not affect any right to private water, 
as defined in section 2 of the repealed Act, which existed immediately before the fixed date.  
125 
Matters pending before Administrative Court  
(1) Any application for the grant of any right or permit for the use of water  shall, on or after the fixed 
date, be determined by the Administrative Court in terms of this Act until a catchment council whose 
responsibility it is to determine or deal with the matter concerned in terms of this Act has been established.  
(2) Notwithstanding the establishment of a catchment council whose responsibility it is to determine 
or deal with the matter concerned in terms of this Act, any matter pending of before the administrative 
Court in terms of subsection (1) shall be determined by the Administrative Court.  
126 
Saving of regulations, etc.  
(1) Any regulations, rules, by-laws, notices, orders or awards which, immediately before the fixed date 
were in force under the repealed Act shall remain in force as if they were made or granted by the appropriate 
authority under this Act.  
(2) Any matter or thing lawfully done, made or commenced under the repealed Act which matter or 
thing immediately before the fixed date was of or capable of acquiring force shall, subject to this Act, 
continue to have or acquire force, as the case may be, and shall be deemed to have been made, done or 
commenced under this Act.  
SCHEDULE (SECTION 9)  
POWERS OF OFFICERS  
1. 
To construct, control, establish, maintain and supervise water works.  
2. 
To do the acts referred to in paragraph 1 at the request of any person on -  
(a) such conditions as may be prescribed;  and  
(b) payment of such charges as may be agreed on between the Secretary and the person.  
3. 
To make estimates, investigations, plans and surveys for water works or hydro-electric power works and to 
record information obtained by means of such investigations and surveys.  
4. 
To examine and advise on any scheme for the alteration, establishment, maintenance or repair of water works 
submitted by irrigation companies involved in combined water schemes, local authorities, owners, lessees or 
occupiers of land, catchment councils or other persons on payment of such fees as may be fixed by the Minister 
in consultation with the National Water Authority.  
5. 
To inspect the courses of public streams and water works and, subject to the approval of the Minister, to order 
any person to do such acts and execute such repairs with respect to water works as the officer concerned may 
consider necessary in the public interest.  
6. 
To obtain and record information concerning the extent of land under irrigation in Zimbabwe, the quantity of 
water used for irrigation and the amount, nature and value of crops obtained through irrigation.  
7. 
To establish and maintain hydrological stations and record the observations made at the stations.  


--- PAGE 50 ---

 
8. 
Generally to obtain and record information and statistics relating to the hydrological conditions of Zimbabwe 
in respect of both surface and ground water.  
9. 
To abstract from any public stream water required for the construction of water works.  
10. To sink boreholes and wells and obtain and conserve supplies of ground water—  
(a) on State land or Communal Land;  or  
(b) at the request of any person under such conditions and on the payment of such fees as may be fixed by 
the Minister in consultation with the National Water Authority.  
11. While engaged in the construction or repair of any water works—  
(a) to erect huts, tents or other temporary buildings;  and  
(b) to park vehicles and any vehicles used by the officer concerned in such construction or repair;  and  
(c) to store any equipment, machinery or supplies to be used by him in connection with such construction 
or repairs;    on any site convenient to him:  
  
   
Provided that—  
(i) 
the officer concerned shall cause as little damage as possible to the site or premises;  
(ii) before the exercise of any power conferred by this paragraph, the person in charge of the construction 
or repair shall give reasonable notice to the owner, lessee or occupier of any land which will be 
affected by the intended exercise of the power;  
(iii) no hut, tent or other temporary buildings shall be erected within three hundred metres of any premises;  
(iv) if the owner, lessee or occupier referred to in proviso (ii) objects to any site chosen for the erection, 
parking or storage referred to in subparagraph (a), (b) or (c), the objection shall be referred to the 
Administrative Court, which may make such order thereon as it thinks fit;  
(v) the Minister shall pay to the owner of land affected by the exercise of power conferred by this 
paragraph in respect of any damage caused thereto such compensation from moneys appropriated by 
Act of Parliament for the purpose as the Minister and such owner may agree or, failing agreement, as 
the Administrative Court may fix.  
12. To enter at all reasonable times on any land, premises or works, with such animals, appliances, instruments, 
machinery, men and vehicles, and to do all such acts thereon as are necessary for or incidental to the exercise 
of the powers of the Minister or of the officer concerned or of any other officer or the discharge of any duty 
imposed on him by this Act:  
  
   
Provided that—  
(i) 
the officer concerned shall cause as little damage as possible to the land, premises or works;  
(ii) the officer concerned shall not enter any premises without the consent of the owner, lessee or occupier 
of the premises;  
(iii) the Minister shall pay to the owner of the land, premises or works in respect of any damage caused 
thereto such compensation from moneys appropriated by Act of Parliament for such purpose as the 
Minister and the owner may agree or, failing agreement, as the Administrative Court may fix.  
13. To exercise any power, other than a power referred to in paragraphs 1 to 12, conferred on the officer concerned 
by or under this Act or any other enactment.  
